Stephanie: Everyone's waiting. Shall we... continue with the ceremony? Ridge: And pretend none of this happened? Like you didn't just tell me that this all a lie? Stephanie: Well, the fact that... they didn't have sex, I mean, that has no bearings on your feelings for Taylor. Let me get the reverend. Ridge: Don't push me! Let me have a chance to think here. [SCENE_BREAK] (Indistinct conversations) Eric: Yeah? Hey there. Steffy: Granddad, where is the minister? Did he leave? This wedding isn't canceled, is it? Eric: I-I sent him up to the house. He seemed uncomfortable down here with the... Felicia: Ooh. Mom's not gonna like that. Steffy: Okay. Thorne: She made it very clear she wanted to speak to Ridge and Taylor alone, Dad. Steffy: Yeah, and Thomas, too, whatever that's about. Eric: He went around back, where the caterers are, is where I sent him. Wouldn't do to have Stephanie yelling at the minister. Felicia: Well, at least he gets to eat. Steffy: Just--I-I want to know what's taking so long. Mom and Dad, they should be married by now. I just--I want to know if everything's okay, you know? Pam: Well, maybe one of us should go check on them. Steffy: I-I'll--I will go. This is driving me nuts waiting. I need to find out what's going on. [SCENE_BREAK] Brooke: (Sighs) And here I thought I'd feel better. Stephen: What, Honey? Brooke: (Sighs) I thought that something would click in my mind, and I would know in my heart that it would finally be time to move on. Stephen: What are you talking about? Brooke: Ridge and Taylor-- they must be married by now. Stephen: Oh. [SCENE_BREAK] Stephanie: Don't make more of this than it is-- Taylor: Stephanie, he asked you not to push him! Ridge: (Sighs) Taylor: Ridge, I-I don't know what kind of decision you want to make, but before you make any kind of decision, I have something to say to you. How could you do this? How could you do this, Thomas? [SCENE_BREAK] Eric: No, that was a big surprise to all of us. (Chuckles) Yes. Thorne: Is Dad talking to Kristen? Felicia: Yeah, not that there's anything to report. Pam: I don't understand what is happening. Stephanie would do anything to see Ridge and Taylor together. I mean, wh-what am I missing? Felicia: I don't know. Maybe Steffy will find out. Oliver: Wait, Steffy went over there? Thorne: Yeah. Marcus: What, did Dayzee go with her? Pam: (Scoffs) I don't think so. Marcus: Oh. 'Cause she's not here anymore, either. [SCENE_BREAK] Dayzee: Anything good? Steffy: What are you doing here? Dayzee: I am following you. I didn't want you interrupting what's going on in there, but I guess you just had spying in mind. Steffy: Okay, fess up. You know what's going on in there, don't you? [SCENE_BREAK] Stephen: I guess you're right. The ceremony is probably over. But Pam said that she would... oh, she did call. Three missed calls. Brooke: Oh, I-if she's waiting for you, Dad, you should... go. Stephen: Oh, no, Honey. Listen. Pam knows that this is exactly where I should be today. Brooke: Actually, I feel like being alone. Stephen: Are you sure? Brooke: Yeah. Stephen: Brooke, I don't know if that's such a good idea. Brooke: (Sighs) Dad, please. (Sighs) I'm sorry. I-I do appreciate you being here for me. I just need a little time. Stephen: Okay. Okay. But if you do need me for anything, you call. I'll come running. Brooke: (Whispers) Okay. Brooke: (Sighs) (Sighs) [SCENE_BREAK] Taylor: Thomas, that you would go along with this lie... Stephanie: Taylor. Taylor, he saw you and Ridge happy together like when he was a child. That's all he wanted-- you, his parents, together. And you can't stand there and deny that you're not still in love with Ridge. Taylor: I will love Ridge till the day I die, but I am not going to stand for a lie to bring us back together. Do you even know me? Do either one of you even know anything about me and what I'm about and what-- how I try to live my life, what I stand for? I cannot believe it, Thomas. I can't believe it. I am really worried about you. I cannot comprehend how you would even think this is okay. Thomas: I'm sorry. Taylor: "Sorry" doesn't cut it! Do you know what I've been through? I thought my son had been abused! Thomas: I don't--I don't know what you want me to say. Okay, when I realized how wrong it was, it was too late. I-I couldn't do anything. Just hope it--it was gonna work out for you and Dad. Taylor: Oh, so you did me a favor by letting me believe that my son had been molested? Thomas: (Whispers) I'm sorry. Taylor: I just-- there aren't even-- I-I can't even put a word to how I feel about what you two have done. Taylor: (Sighs) I thought Brooke was... (Sniffles) The one who poisoned you and corrupted you. But it really wasn't her. It was you. [SCENE_BREAK] Steffy: Dayzee, just tell me what you know. Look, can't you just see how freaked out I am? Come on. Dayzee: It's not my place. Steffy: So it's big? Like the wedding's not gonna happen, big? Dayzee: I don't-- I don't know, Steffy. I'm sorry. I know this must be really frustrating. Steffy: Yeah, it is. You know, I have waited a long time to have my parents back together. Dayzee: Who knows? Maybe they still will. I'm sure we're gonna hear something soon. Just... just be prepared, though. No matter what happens, nothing will ever be the same... for any of us. [SCENE_BREAK] Stephen: Brooke, Honey, I forgot my phone. Brooke? (Cell phone rings) (Rings) Stephen: Hello. Pam: (Scoffs) Stephen. Finally! (Scoffs) I've called you, like, a bazillion times. Stephen: I'm sorry. I was with Brooke. I didn't hear it. Pam: (Sighs) I wish you had been over here with me, because I am stressing out, Stephen. I am really stressing out. Stephen: Why? Wh-what's happening? Pam: First of all, you should see the state of this kitchen that I have to work in. Steffy has practically no kitchen supplies. Stephen: But wait a minute. I thought you were at Ridge and Taylor's wedding. Pam: Stephen, keep up. That's what I'm trying to tell you. We are all over here, crammed into this little guesthouse of Steffy's, and nobody even knows if the wedding is gonna happen or not. Stephen: What? Pam: Stephanie interrupted the ceremony, Stephen. Can you believe it? And now... (Scoffs) Nobody even knows what's going on. Stephen: Well, I've gotta find Brooke. I've gotta tell her. (Hangs up cell phone) Stephen: Brooke? [SCENE_BREAK] Stephanie: Honey, I just wanted to end this--this madness with Brooke. Thomas: It was wrong. Okay, I know that. Taylor: All this time when you said nothing, you allowed your mother and father to make fools of themselves, planning a wedding, believing something bad had happened to you, and you said nothing. Stephanie: But he wanted to. He wanted to tell the truth. He really did. Taylor: And you allowed us to go up before the minister. That is so wrong. Thomas: Mom, I wanted to. I did. But I-I also know how much you love Dad. I-I have to admit, I-I did it for myself, too. I benefited. Grandma made me promises. Ridge: Promises? What promises? Eric: Stephanie? Everybody needs to know what's going on in here. Stephanie: Eric, Honey, please. Eric: I need to tell them something. Ridge? Taylor? Stephanie? You've been hiding something from me for days now. Ridge: You're not alone. Eric: What is it? What have you gotten yourself into? Ridge: Dad, we're trying to work something out here it's best to just let us talk about it. Taylor: Yeah. Eric: All right. I'll hold everybody off a little longer. But whatever this is, you need to settle it. You need to settle this fast. Ridge: I'll ask you again. What promises are you talking about? Thomas: Grandma's giving me her shares of the company-- or she was. She changed her will to give me 25% of Forrester. Stephanie: Because he deserves it. He's talented, and he's the future of the company. Ridge: And could keep me away from Brooke, right? Stephanie: That, too. Taylor: (Scoffs) You bribed our son. Stephanie: I did. I've wanted to get rid of Brooke for years. I saw the opportunity, and I grabbed it. Taylor: That is so mean of you, Stephanie. You built me up. You encouraged me. You made me believe I was going to have the life that I've always wanted, only to have it yanked away! Stephanie: But it doesn't have to be. Taylor: (Scoffs) Stephanie: Ridge, please, this is your wedding. You're going to marry her again, the woman that you should never have left in the first place. And you know that's the truth. What other decision could you possibly make? [SCENE_BREAK] Jackie: Okay, did it seem like they were wrapping it up, or... Eric: I have no idea. Jackie: Oh. Eric: Look, I'm sure they would understand if you all wanted to leave. Steffy: Hey, no, no, no. Let's just--let's stay and--and be supportive, okay, and hope for the best. Eric: Look--did you find out any more than I did? I mean, it didn't look good to me. Steffy: No, I don't know. It--it--it did look intense, but that doesn't mean the wedding is off. Look, I'm not ready to believe that. I'm just... I'm just not. [SCENE_BREAK] Stephen: Katie, it's Dad. Have you heard from Brooke? Katie: No. Is something wrong? Stephen: Well, I-I-I may have good news. I don't know. But Pam called and said that Stephanie stopped the wedding. Katie: What? Why? Stephen: I don't know. I--but I have to find Brooke. I have to tell her. Katie: Well, a-are you at the house? Stephen: Yeah. I-I've been looking for her. I was with her not ten minutes ago. Maybe she left when I was upstairs I don't know Katie: Okay, I'm coming over. Stephen: No, no, I want you to stay right there in case she comes to you. And --and will you keep trying her cell phone for me? Katie: Sure. Yeah. Dad, if they don't get married today... Stephen: I know. I know. She's been so depressed. This could change everything. Katie: Go find her. Stephen: Yeah. [SCENE_BREAK] Taylor: Ridge, more than anything, I want to marry you. I-I want to call everybody back in here, and I-I want to get back on with the ceremony. But I'm... I'm not foolish. I-I know everything's changed. Ridge: Not my feelings for you, Taylor. I still love you. Taylor: I know. But... (Sighs) After all these years, I've come to accept your feelings for Brooke. And... (Sighs) She didn't do anything wrong, and... even though I'm relieved that nothing happened to our son, I'm... Ridge: (Sighs) Taylor: (Scoffs) I just don't want this marriage to be based on a lie. Ridge: I don't think that's the way either of us would want it. Taylor: Well, really, you were the one who was deceived, Ridge. You--you gave up an entire life. Ridge: (Sighs) Taylor: And... I'm okay with whatever you need to do to make it right. I... whatever you want to do, it's-- it's your decision. [SCENE_BREAK] Stephen: Hey, any news? Pam: (Sighs) No, not yet. Hey, look, have you talked to Brooke yet? Stephen: No, I can't find her. But her car is still here. Pam: Well, I've been thinking, and I think maybe you should wait. Stephen: Why? Pam: I just don't think you should get her hopes up for no reason. Stephen: But you said Stephanie stopped the wedding. That's reason enough. Pam: Well, yeah, I-I thought that at first, but now I'm not so sure. I mean, it's not like anybody's been sent home, right? Don't you think that somebody would have said something if they were gonna cancel the wedding? Honey, I-I think that maybe Ridge just wants some space, you know someone to love him without all the drama. And I hate to say it, but that's not Brooke. I'm just thinking that maybe Ridge and Taylor are gonna work it out, whatever it is. Stephen: I just feel Brooke should know. But I think you're right. I don't want to get her hopes up. Pam: Yeah, well, look, I'll let you know if-- if anything happens, okay? Stephen: Thank you, Sweetheart. Oh, Brooke, where are you? [SCENE_BREAK] Jackie: Mm. Owen: So do you want to stay, or do you want to go? Jackie: Oh. (Groans) I suppose we should wait until it's officially off... (Sighs) Although a nice hot bath and a glass of champagne sounds so much more appealing than hanging around here. Owen: Mm-hmm. Nick: You two are not leaving me here. Maybe Steffy will let you use her bath. Jackie: Oh. Owen: Oh, no. (Door opens) Pam: Steph. Eric: Stephanie. Steffy: Grandma, what's happening? What--is the wedding still on? Felicia: Mom?