{"name": "Chapter 14", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180325141142/http://www.gradesaver.com/what-maisie-knew/study-guide/summary-chapters-13-18", "summary": "Mrs. Beale greets Maisie with hugs and praise, and Maisie interestingly notes that her stepmother is acting \"in the very manner of her mother\". Maisie notes anew how beautiful Mrs. Beale is, especially now that she is a bit older. Early in the conversation, Mrs. Beale reveals that Sir Claude has indeed been visiting her. Sir Claude is chagrined at his lie coming out, saying that he told it \"to protect reputation\" , but Maisie informs him that she already knew the truth from Mrs. Wix. Maisie tells Sir Claude that she was not bothered by his lie but that Mrs. Wix was. Mrs. Beale, Maisie, and Sir Claude discuss Sir Claude visiting often while Maisie is living at her father's house. Maisie tells Mrs. Beale about how Mrs. Wix has said she is saving Sir Claude by being his duty and his life, and Mrs. Beale says that she wants to do the same. The two adults commiserate about their spouses. Abruptly, it is decided that Maisie will stay at the house and live with her father for a while and Sir Claude will send her luggage the next day. Sir Claude compliments Maisie on her beauty, and Mrs. Beale explains that he means beauty of character. Maisie compliments both adults back, saying they look beautiful together. Maisie begs Sir Claude to come back the next day, thinking that it is actually more fun to be with Sir Claude and Mrs. Beale than Sir Claude and Mrs. Wix. She does regret that she won't get to say goodbye to Mrs. Wix, but Sir Claude says he will deal with Mrs. Wix and Ida. Mrs. Beale suggests that Maisie should start taking classes \"at institutions--on subjects\" , including French literature and history. When Maisie seems frightened at the prospect, Sir Claude and Mrs. Beale say that they'll attend the lessons as well. The chapter ends with Maisie fretting again about Mrs. Wix but having her fear and guilt assuaged once again by Sir Claude's promise to \"square her\"", "analysis": "Sir Claude's character begins to be tarnished in this section due to his repeated lying to Maisie. While Sir Claude might have originally been seen by the reader as one of the book's protagonists, James makes sure to give all of his adult characters, including Sir Claude, negative qualities. The reader is forced to feel as Maisie does: that the world of adults is full of deceit and instability. While Sir Claude eventually tells Maisie that he lied to her to protect her from getting \"mixed up\" , it seems likely that he didn't tell more for the sake of his own guilt and his fear of Ida. Maisie and Sir Claude's relationship is also negatively affected in this section by Maisie using her performative stupidity on him for the first time. At the age of six or seven, Maisie taught herself to appear stupid when her parents Ida and Beale asked her to repeat rude messages to one another. This act contrasts Maisie with a normally developing child, who would not have to pretend not to understand but rather would be truly innocent. Maisie not using her performance of stupidity with Sir Claude until this point in the book showed that she trusted him to see her for herself rather than as a pawn to get information. This makes her choice to pretend to be stupid when he asks her about her conversation with the Captain an important turning point in their relationship. Maisie's interaction with the Captain in Chapter 16 shows that Maisie still loves and wants the best for her mother after all the trauma she has experienced. She believes that the Captain truly loves her mother, and she begs him to not love her mother \"only for just a little...like all the others\" . Maisie seems to do this completely selflessly, which shows great maturity, but she also seems naively to not understand her mother's nature. When Ida reveals that she is no longer with the Captain later in the book, Maisie strangely seems more upset than when Ida has separated from Beale or Sir Claude. Perhaps Maisie puts so much faith in the relationship between the Captain and Ida because through the Captain's adoring eyes, Maisie herself was able to love and forgive her mother. Besides containing Maisie's longest interaction with her father in the course of the novel, Chapter 18 stands out for the many symbols of wealth, to which James continually draws the reader's attention. Of particular importance is the symbol of the electric light outside the Countess's house. Electricity would have been very rare at a private residence in the late 19th century; it was invented in 1879 and took decades to become commercially widespread. This is supported by how Maisie describes seeing the lightbulb, noting, \"the vividness, the almost blinding whiteness of the light\" . This shows that she does in unfamiliar with the object. The electric lightbulb is used to show how rich the Countess is, as well as to show her contemporary style, in contrast with many of the other women in Maisie's life. It is important to note that wealth and social status were not one and the same in late 19th century England. Ida and Beale Farange are undoubtedly part of the upper class, attending upscale social gatherings and interacting with people of wealth and import. However, this section makes it clear that both characters struggle financially. Ida's lack of money is shown primarily through Mrs. Wix, a lower-class and poorly-educated woman, being Maisie's governess. Maisie notes earlier in the book that Mrs. Wix is not always paid and that when Ida and Sir Claude travel together, she and Mrs. Wix must scrape together odd meals from whatever is left in the house. Maisie is similarly limited while at her father's house, a fact which is most obvious at the beginning of Chapter 18. James writes that, \" had partaken together at home of the light vague meal--Maisie's name for it was a 'jam-supper' -- to which they were reduced when Mr. Farange sought his pleasure abroad\" . Then, while at the Exhibition, they can not see any of the sideshows because of a \"paucity of sixpences\" , a quite small sum of money. This is contrasted when later in the chapter Maisie goes to the Countess's house and sees how the truly rich live."}