{"name": "Chapter 17", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180410182628/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-marrow-of-tradition/study-guide/summary-chapters-16-20", "summary": "After dropping Ellis off at his apartment, Tom Delamere makes his way to the St. James Hotel for some cards and drink before he has to return home. Upon arriving at the hotel, Tom meets Captain McBane and proposes a game of poker in his room. McBane has been waiting for the opportunity to take advantage of Delamere. He has noticed how Delamere cheats at cards and knows that he can take advantage of this trickery. McBane wants to become a part of the Clarendon Club, the one hundred year old social club for those of \"birth, wealth, and breeding\" in Wellington. He plans to use Delamere to help him get into this club. After several hours of card playing and drinking, Delamere loses all of his money. McBane extends him credit and by the end of the evening, \"flushed with excitement and wine. he was vaguely conscious that he owed McBane a considerable sum\" of one thousand dollars. Delamere knows that he does not have the money and McBane tells him they will talk on the matter later. The next day, at the hotel, McBane brings up the issue of his membership in the club. Tom is annoyed at the request by someone of such low social status but, since his debts are so high, he feels he must oblige. He tries to think of ways to pay off the debt. He knows that he cannot ask his old grandfather for the money since he does not know that Tom drinks and plays cards. Only his old Aunt Polly would have the money, but Tom knows that she will make \"him wait until she died, which might not be for ten years or more, for a legacy which was steadily growing less and might be entirely exhausted if she lived long enough. Tom suggests that they leave the matter open for a few days while he tests the waters with his fellow club members. That evening, with no money in his pocket, Tom goes to visit Sandy. He asks Sandy if he has any savings he can borrow and Sandy reluctantly lets him take fifty dollars but warns him that if his grandfather were to find out about his misdeeds, it might cause another stroke. Tom agrees to pay the money back. When he returns to the club, he is set up by a group of club members who find out that he is cheating at cards. The members are called together and they agree to spare Tom the shame of the matter if he quietly resigns from the club and pays back all $1500 of his debt within three days. Tom acquiesces, though he does not know where he will find the money", "analysis": "Chesnutt continues this theme of economic justice in the next chapter focusing on Captain McBane. In Southern hierarchy, the slave drivers and poor whites of the antebellum South have retained few rights and those that they did have come only because of race. McBane represents this crude class of poor white Southerners who, by the fortune of capitalism, was able to pull himself into respectable society. Chesnutt uses an aside by his narrator in Chapter Seventeen to reveal to the reader McBane's true feelings and aspirations -- just as McBane seeks to attack the black community, he also plans to \"assault society in its citadel\" by seeking to become a member at the Clarendon Club. That Tom Delamere speaks on his behalf is only a demonstration of the decline of white aristocracy from its principles and its past. The narrative of Sandy's false imprisonment and near lynching in the book's middle chapters is a sub-plot of the novel's larger narrative. Chesnutt has been slowly building up this sub-plot, with Sandy's dismissal from the Methodist Church and Delamere's gambling problems as the crises leading to the murder of Mrs. Ochiltree. This sub-plot foreshadows the riot that will take place in the novel's closing chapters. It also involves several characters that will prove pivotal during the riot, most importantly Josh Green. Chesnutt uses this sub-plot to illustrate the common practice of false accusations that often led to the lynchings of black men. Though Polly Ochiltree is a despised woman, Chesnutt demonstrates how the town's white males will use her murder and alleged rape to persecute a black man -- any black man -- as a defense of feminine honor. Chesnutt suggests that Southern white culture used female sexuality as a veil to disguise their racial hatred and contempt. This also ties into laws of mixed marriage and mixed race children, which were considered impure. Chesnutt argues that racial purity is a delusion of hatred, not of honor. This \"shocking crime\" is the basis for a proposed lynching. Lynching was a crime committed by white mobs throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries against black men and, sometimes, women. The black person would be accused of a crime, often rape, and the mob would carry out a violent act of justice, usually hanging or burning at the stake, as a way to punish the criminal. The act, however, was actually meant as a mode of violent oppression and warning to the black community. The Marrow of Tradition can be seen as an argument through storytelling against the practice of lynching. According to Chesnutt, lynching is a misuse of justice because it undermines the democratic legal proceedings upheld by the public. It is a perversion of justice meant not to keep order but to subject a people to an unjust order of racial domination."}