{"name": "volume 3, Chapter 54", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210419020931/http://www.gradesaver.com/emma/study-guide/summary-chapters-50-55", "summary": "Harriet Smith is to be married to Robert Martin. Emma is somewhat disappointed by Harriet's decision, as Mr. Knightley suspects, but he reminds her that Harriet will be happy and secure. When Frank Churchill and Jane Fairfax visit Highbury, Emma realizes that Mr. Knightley was the most suitable choice for her.", "analysis": "This chapter concludes Harriet Smith's romantic pursuits, as she agrees to marry the man whom she was originally meant to marry. She has given up the pretensions that Emma instilled in her and finally accepted her devoted suitor. This emphasizes the negative effect that Emma had on the young woman. If not for Emma's interventions, Harriet would have married Robert Martin sooner and been immediately content. By taking Harriet under her wing and giving her a sense of vanity, Emma postponed Harriet's happiness with a succession of heartbreaks. It is important to note how Emma has changed in this chapter. She is a bit disappointed by Harriet's engagement, for she still harbors some wish that Harriet could find a more highborn husband, but comes to realize that Harriet's connections are worse than Robert Martin's and that Harriet can only benefit from the match. Emma has come to agree with Mr. Knightley's earlier view that Harriet's marriage to Robert Martin is the most sensible choice. The similarity between Emma Woodhouse and Frank Churchill becomes more evident in this chapter. Both require spouses who will bring out their best qualities while subduing their worst. Frank Churchill and Emma indulge each other's vanity and immaturity, but with the influence of Jane Fairfax and Mr. Knightley, respectively, Frank and Emma become more sensible and decent persons. It becomes clear that they would ultimately have been unsuitable for one another. In the novel, the relationships that work best are those in which the spouses complement each other but do not necessarily resemble one another Mr. and Mrs. Elton share a vulgar attention to social status and an utter lack of consideration for others' feelings. But Jane Fairfax counters Frank's insubstantial character with a reserved demeanor, Robert Martin is sensible where Harriet Smith is foolish and gullible, and Mr. Knightley is perceptive where Emma misjudges situations"}