{"name": "Chapter 21", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416023755/https://www.gradesaver.com/kidnapped/study-guide/summary-chapters-21-25", "summary": "They walked in the dark uphill until they came to a cleft of a great mountain, named Corrynakiegh, where a cave lay in which they could hide. They remained in this spot for nearly five pleasant days. They could sneak to a spot near the river and make a fire to warm themselves and cook the fish they caught in the river. Alan attempted to teach David how to use a sword. He was never pleased with David's progress and David thought at times that he might run the sword through him. But, David was pleased with his ability to stand in against Alan. Soon, Alan mentioned that it would be awhile before the red coats found them. It was time to contact James and have him send money. David wondered how he would accomplish this contact but Alan was resourceful and made a cross out of wood in the tradition of the fiery cross, a signal for the gathering of his clan. He attached the silver button he had given David along with sprigs of birch and fir. Then, Alan explained that he would leave the cross outside the window of John Breck Maccol, a friend of his. John would recognize the button. Also, he would be able to discern that the two sprigs identified in which part of the heather Alan was hiding. David was skeptical but the plan worked and, shortly, the bouman approached the heather. Alan explained to him that he was needed as a messenger. The bouman required that Alan write his plea so Alan found a quill and, using gunpowder, wrote a message. Three days later the bouman reappeared with a message from Mrs. Stewart, detailing the events which had transpired. James and some servants were imprisoned as facilitators, wanted signs for Alan and David covered the country, and red coats were uncovering buried arms. She included a small sum of money, a blessing for their safety, and a copy of the wanted poster. Alan was pleased with the description of his French wear. David was also pleased because he had since changed his clothes and was thus safer. He suggested that Alan change his clothes but Alan refused. David began to think that he may be safer away alone because he would not be recognized. Still, he could not be disloyal. Alan asked the bouman for his button back but John Breck said he had lost it. Alan did not believe him and the button was returned to David.", "analysis": "The duality of self is explored in the relationship of David and Alan as two sides to a complete human persona. Alan tells David, \"Ye're a man of small contrivance, David. They agree that hiding in Corrynakiegh is a good time to send to James for money. However, David does not see how they can possibly contact James and his family while he and Alan are hiding and have no means of communication. David is looking for logical, straightforward ways of affecting an action and when he does not see an easy possibility, he is incapable of looking further. He lacks creativity and romantic imagination. Alan, by contrast, knows that if he thinks about the problem for a long enough time, he will invent some way of solving it. He is inventive and enterprising, refusing to be easily quieted. Creatively and constructively, Alan makes a cross which stands as a metonym for Alan's clan and his people's long history and tradition. The cross and the signified objects which he attaches to the symbol are a very clever way of communicating his need. David would not have imagined a vehicle of communicating which was so deeply endowed with meaning using the limited tools available. Over the course of the five days spent in the cave at Corrynakiegh, David and Alan have a slight chance to relax. The river they use for fishing, bathing, and dining is hidden from sight in the mountain so that they are relatively safe at all times. Alan notes that the red coats will not determine their position for a while. The literary critic, Kiely, analyzes this passage of the novel as such, \"Throughout their flight, while hotly pursued by semi-barbarous Campbells out for revenge, and troops of redcoats with a warrant for their arrest, the two heroes insist upon acting like vacationers on a walking tour of the Highlands. He then inserts the quotation from this chapter which discusses the two men competing to be the best fisherman. The scene is certainly jovial and filled with testosterone-esque competition, yet the assertion by Kiely is not completely fair when considering the surrounding circumstances. This event is one of the few relaxed times in the novel, especially over the course of the escape, and it allows the reader to view the boyishness and limitations inherent in each character. The playfulness reveals a greater humanity and solidifies the bond which is growing between the two men"}