Stephanie wants to get on with the wedding. 
Ridge is flustered. He needs time to think about all these lies. 
The guests talk amongst themselves wondering what is wrong. 
Stephen holds Brooke and she says Ridge ought to be married by now. 
Stephen isn't sure it's such a good idea when Brooke says she appreciates him being there, but would like to be alone now. 
Taylor snaps at Stephanie to be quiet. Ridge needs this time. She has something to say to Thomas. 
She points her finger at him and wonders how he could do this. 
Dayzee follows Steffy to the main house and tells her that she doesn't want her spying or interrupting what is going on in there. 
She laments to Steffy that no matter what happens, things won't ever be the same again. 
Taylor rants at Stephanie that she loves Ridge with all her heart, but she does not want him like this starting with a lie. 
Thomas was doing her no favors by making her believe that her son was molested.
All this time she thought it was Brooke that poisoned and corrupted him, but it wasn't. 
It was Stephanie. Pam calls Stephen and explains they are all crammed into the guest house but there is no wedding yet. 
Stephen searches for Brooke, but can't find her. 
She's sitting quietly in the courtyard by the pond. 
Thomas confides to Taylor and Ridge that it was more than just a lie to get them back together. 
Stephanie made him promises. He was giving her 25% of the company. 
Eric interrupts and says he knows that Stephanie has been keeping something important from him. 
Ridge says this is not the time; they do need to hear Stephanie out now and will fill him in later. 
Stephanie makes no bones about what she did. Thomas deserved it; he's the future of the company. 
If it helped to get rid of Brooke, okay, that too. Ridge is marrying the woman he loves;
 the woman he never should have left in the first place, so they can get on with the wedding now. 
 Stephen calls Katie and says he has good news and bad news. 
 The wedding is off for now and he wants to tell Brooke. 
 She's been so depressed lately and this could change everything, but he can't find her. 
 Taylor tells Ridge that she still wants to marry him, but she's not foolish. 
 She knows things have changed. He says not his love for her. 
 She realizes he gave up an entire life for her, so whatever he wants to do, it's his decision. 
 Brooke looks up and sees Ridge in his wedding suit slipping rose petals into the pond.