{"name": "Chapter 23", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180325141142/http://www.gradesaver.com/what-maisie-knew/study-guide/summary-chapters-19-24", "summary": "Mrs. Wix explains the situation further: Ida came to visit Mrs. Wix at her own lowly house and gave her a ten-pound note to go to France. Sir Claude hints to Maisie that this could have been the money Ida took out and then put away while talking with Maisie in the garden. Mrs. Wix says that she was sent so that Susan Ash can go back to England. Sir Claude suggests that he will take Susan Ash back, as he was the one who took her to France in the first place and she shouldn't have to venture back alone. Maisie and Mrs. Wix are both very against this plan. Sir Claude asks whether Ida was alone when she visited Mrs. Wix, and Mrs. Wix blushes as she replies that there was a man waiting in the cab. Mrs. Wix and Sir Claude talk about Ida further, agreeing that Sir Claude is free and that Ida seems to have completely given up responsibility for Maisie. Mrs. Wix says that she \"almost admire\" Ida for her recent decisions. Sir Claude steers the conversation back to who was in the cab; Mrs. Wix says that it wasn't the Captain but that she doesn't want to talk about it in front of Maisie. Sir Claude and Maisie say that it is just fine to do so, so Mrs. Wix says it is someone named Mr. Tischbein. Both Sir Claude and Maisie seem to take this lightly. Mrs. Wix slightly offends Maisie with what she says next; she tells them that she has been sent so that Maisie can be raised by \"a decent person\" , implying that Sir Claude is not decent enough to raise her properly. She elaborates that she is also intended to save Sir Claude from himself and keep him decent. Sir Claude tells Mrs. Wix that she is \"too hard on Mrs. Beale\". When Sir Claude distractedly looks for his hat, Maisie sees it first and runs to give it to him. They stare at each other, both holding the hat, until Mrs. Wix interrupts to ask whether he is really going back. Maisie adds the question of whether his going back would be to see Mrs. Beale. Sir Claude deflects the question, saying they'll talk about it tomorrow and that he needs to go outside for a while. Before he can leave, Mrs. Wix accuses him of being afraid of Mrs. Beale and he agrees with her. Sir Claude leaves and Maisie thinks about how he is also afraid of her mother, and perhaps of Mrs. Wix as well", "analysis": "As a modern reader, it is difficult to read Maisie's racist impressions of the Countess in Chapter 19. She repeatedly calls the Countess \"the brown lady\"  and states that \"She literally struck the child more as an animal than as a 'real' lady; she might have been a clever frizzled poodle in a frill or a dreadful human monkey in a spangled petticoat. She had a nose that was far too big and eyes that were far too small and a moustache that was, well, not so happy a feature as Sir Claude's\" . This antiquated, discriminatory language toward people of African descent is all the more shocking and disturbing coming from a child. It must be imagined that Maisie's racist thoughts are the product of her upbringing, another negative effect of her parents' and guardians' speech and behavior being passed down to her. It is also important to note that James created the Countess as a confident, financially self-sufficient character, showing that any negative characterization comes from Maisie rather than the author or narrator. Ida's presence in Folkestone in Chapters 20 and 21 mark a turning point in the story: the last time either of Maisie's biological parents is involved in the story. This makes it an apt time to examine Jame's moral message regarding family. The story raises questions about three kinds of relations: biological, legal, and emotional. By the removal of Ida and Beale from Maisie's life, James shows that biological relation is not the last word in creating a stable family. The major question for the remainder of the book is whether legal relatedness will take any precedence over emotional relatedness in Maisie's choice of a guardian, as well as to whom, out of Sir Claude, Mrs. Wix, and Mrs. Beale, she has the strongest legal and emotional relationships. Letters are a motif in What Maisie Knew, particularly in this section of the novel. Throughout the book, letters are used to represent relationships. Communication by letter makes it easy to keep relationships secret, though it also makes relationships subject to obstruction by others. This can be seen earlier in the novel when Mrs. Wix tries to stay in communication with Maisie but is thwarted by Miss Overmore/Mrs. Beale as well as when Sir Claude keeps his relationship with Miss Overmore/Mrs. Beale a secret from Maisie by communicating with her mostly through letters. In this section of the book, Sir Claude and Miss Overmore/Mrs. Beale again communicate through letters, showing their continued romantic relationship. Of particular importance is the letter--or rather, letters--in Chapter 24. Miss Overmore/Mrs. Beale sends a letter to Sir Claude which includes a letter from Beale to her effectively breaking off their marriage. The symbol of a letter within a letter shows how adultery and lies have muddled relationships between multiple characters. Another motif that recurs at multiple points in this section is the blushing and paling of characters. This communicates information about characters' emotional states. Characters are shown to pale in moments of shock or horror and blush in moments of embarrassment or passion. For example, when Beale asks Maisie if she'll join him in moving to America at the beginning of this section, James writes, \"Planted once more before him in the middle of the room she felt herself turning white\" . This shows her displeasure at the idea, even though she answers affirmatively. An example of a character blushing comes later in the section when Sir Claude asks Mrs. Wix whether Ida was alone when she came to call. The text reads, \"Mrs Wix was red now: his good humour wouldn't keep down her colour, which for a minute glowed there like her ugly honesty\" . In this case, Mrs. Wix's blush reveals her embarrassment for Sir Claude and her strong feelings about Ida's immorality. Violent imagery is used frequently in this section of the novel to depict Ida and Beale's behavior toward Maisie. In Chapter 21, Ida brutally tells Maisie that \"Your father wishes you were dead\" , and two chapters later Sir Claude remarks that \" has chucked our friend here overboard not a bit less than if she had shoved her, shrieking and pleading, out of that window and down two floors to the paving-stones\" . By describing both Beale and Ida wishing or causing the death of Maisie, James communicates that Maisie's relationship with her biological parents is completely finished. The vivid, violent language also communicates how severely James treats Ida and Beale's choice to abandon their child."}