{"name": "Chapter 30", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180325141142/http://www.gradesaver.com/what-maisie-knew/study-guide/summary-chapters-25-31", "summary": "Maisie and Sir Claude sit together in a cafe, drinking coffee and eating rolls. Sir Claude tells Maisie about being in London, and Maisie notices that Sir Claude seems more nervous than she's ever seen him. They discuss whether they will all--Sir Claude, Mrs. Beale, Mrs. Wix, and Maisie--be eating together later in the day. When Sir Claude asks what Mrs. Wix has told Maisie about him and Mrs. Beale, Maisie plays dumb and simply says \"Nothing\". After a pause, Sir Claude changes his question, asking if Mrs. Wix has tried to affect Maisie. Maisie again avoids the question, saying that Mrs. Wix has been enjoying how nice Mrs. Beale has been to her over the past few days. Maisie shows Sir Claude that she doesn't trust him by being skeptical that he hasn't seen Mrs. Beale yet since arriving in France. Sir Claude again says that he has come to see Maisie, not Mrs. Beale. They both agree that Mrs. Beale is not going to go back to London on her own accord. After getting more food and drink from a waiter, Sir Claude exclaims that he came back to ask Maisie something. Maisie thinks that he is going to ask whether she would be happy living with just Mrs. Beale and Mrs. Wix. He says that was not his question, but he gets fixated momentarily on the idea that Mrs. Wix now approves of Mrs. Beale raising Maisie so long as he is not involved. He accuses Mrs. Wix of having affected Maisie and says that he doesn't love Mrs. Wix, even though he knows that she loves him. Mustering up his willpower, he finally asks Maisie his question: \"Should you see your way to let go. Should you see your way to sacrifice her. He suggests that Maisie should live with him and Mrs. Beale abroad. Maisie worries about what would happen to Mrs. Wix then, and Sir Claude callously says that everyone has their difficulties. They discuss Maisie's education, with Sir Claude insulting the education Mrs. Wix has been providing. They pay for the meal, and Sir Claude presses Maisie again on whether she would ever live without him. Maisie promises she wouldn't, so Sir Claude asks her to make the decision about living with him and Mrs. Beale. Maisie asks to have some time to think, and they decide that they won't go back to the hotel right away. Maisie also says that she'd like to see Mrs. Wix before deciding. The chapter ends with Maisie again bringing up how she brought Sir Claude in and Mrs. Wix together, which makes Sir Claude momentarily brighten from his nervous state", "analysis": "Contemporary readers might be confused by James's use of the phrase \"making love\" in this section of the book, as when James writes, \"There was a phrase familiar to Maisie, so often was it used by this lady to express the idea of one's getting what one wanted: one got it--Mrs. Beale always said she at all events always got it or proposed to get it--by 'making love'. She was at present making love, singular as it appeared, to Mrs. Wix\" . To understand what is going on in the plot at this point, a reader must look to the transformation of this phrase over time. Up until the late 19th century, the phrase was defined as wooing someone or making them fall in love with you. This was Mrs. Beale's goal in this chapter; while Mrs. Beale does not want Mrs. Wix to be romantically in love with her, she wants the woman to like and accept her. It was in the early 20th century that the phrase came to take on the connotation of sexual intercourse, meaning it is possible for James, who published the novel in 1897, to have intended for the phrase to be a double entendre. James escalates the suspense over who Maisie will choose as her guardian at the end of Chapter 28. Maisie and Mrs. Wix argue about whether Maisie should be raised by Sir Claude and Mrs. Beale, and Maisie professes that she wants to be raised by \" alone or nobody\" . When Mrs. Wix inquires, \"Not even me?\" , Maisie replies, \"Oh, you're nobody!\" . While Maisie's eventual choice of Mrs. Wix has been foreshadowed by the girl's trust of the governess ever since their first meeting, this moment subverts the reader's expectation, building tension and intrigue. Maisie's statement might even be read as attempting to push Mrs. Wix away to test her love. As Maisie and her guardians spend the final chapters of the book in Boulogne, France, James includes certain phrases in French without translation . As the novel was written in the late 19th century in England, James likely assumed that educated readers would be able to translate the French phrases. While many of the uses of French serve merely to create a rich setting and show Sir Claude and Mrs. Beale's comfort in France due to their levels of education, a particular situation at the end of Chapter 29 warrants further analysis. As Sir Claude and Maisie leave to get breakfast together, Sir Claude stops an employee of the hotel where they are staying to ask for food to be sent to Mrs. Wix. The employee responds, \"Soyez tranquille...Et pour Madame?\"  This translates to \"Rest assured...and for your wife?\" . This shows that the hotel is treating Sir Claude and Mrs. Beale as husband and wife, likely because they requested for her bags to be taken to his room. Sir Claude feigns confusion, responding, \"Madame?\" , perhaps because he fears Maisie would understand the underlying significance of what the employee has said. Morality is one of the major themes of What Maisie Knew, and it is particularly strong in the last chapters of the novel. Mrs. Wix begins to passionately question Maisie's morality in Chapter 26, asking her repeatedly if she has a \"moral sense\" . Mrs. Wix seems to be questioning Maisie's morality because Maisie does not denounce Sir Claude and Miss Overmore/Mrs. Beale's relationship. Maisie likely does not react strongly to Sir Claude and Miss Overmore/Mrs. Beale's affair because of how many examples of adultery she has seen in her childhood. This underscores the moral of the novel, which is that mistreating children or exposing them to trauma has long-lasting negative effects. James makes heavy use of tactile imagery in the final scene of the novel in which Mrs. Wix, Sir Claude, and Mrs. Beale battle to be Maisie's guardian. James writes, \" threw herself upon the child and, before Maisie could resist, had sunk with her upon the sofa, possessed of her, encircling her\" . The negative language used to describe the way Mrs. Beale is touching Maisie shows that young girl does not have a positive association with the woman and sees through her ploy of possessing her to ensnare Sir Claude. Later, when Mrs. Beale realizes that Maisie is not going to choose her, James writes, \"Maisie's back became aware of a push that vented resentment\" . Specifying that Maisie's back felt the push from Mrs. Beale gives the reader a vivid understanding of Maisie's sensations, keeping the reader focused on her perception of the event occurring."}