

That night Hurstwood remained down town entirely, going to the Palmer
House for a bed after his work was through. He was in a fevered state of
mind, owing to the blight his wife's action threatened to cast upon
his entire future. While he was not sure how much significance might be
attached to the threat she had made, he was sure that her attitude, if
long continued, would cause him no end of trouble. She was determined,
and had worsted him in a very important contest. How would it be from
now on? He walked the floor of his little office, and later that of his
room, putting one thing and another together to no avail.

Mrs. Hurstwood, on the contrary, had decided not to lose her advantage
by inaction. Now that she had practically cowed him, she would follow up
her work with demands, the acknowledgment of which would make her word
LAW in the future. He would have to pay her the money which she would
now regularly demand or there would be trouble. It did not matter what
he did. She really did not care whether he came home any more or not.
The household would move along much more pleasantly without him, and she
could do as she wished without consulting any one. Now she proposed to
consult a lawyer and hire a detective. She would find out at once just
what advantages she could gain.

Hurstwood walked the floor, mentally arranging the chief points of
his situation. "She has that property in her name," he kept saying to
himself. "What a fool trick that was. Curse it! What a fool move that
was."

He also thought of his managerial position. "If she raises a row now
I'll lose this thing. They won't have me around if my name gets in the
papers. My friends, too!" He grew more angry as he thought of the talk
any action on her part would create. How would the papers talk about it?
Every man he knew would be wondering. He would have to explain and deny
and make a general mark of himself. Then Moy would come and confer with
him and there would be the devil to pay.

Many little wrinkles gathered between his eyes as he contemplated this,
and his brow moistened. He saw no solution of anything--not a loophole
left.

Through all this thoughts of Carrie flashed upon him, and the
approaching affair of Saturday. Tangled as all his matters were, he did
not worry over that. It was the one pleasing thing in this whole rout of
trouble. He could arrange that satisfactorily, for Carrie would be glad
to wait, if necessary. He would see how things turned out to-morrow, and
then he would talk to her. They were going to meet as usual. He saw only
her pretty face and neat figure and wondered why life was not arranged
so that such joy as he found with her could be steadily maintained. How
much more pleasant it would be. Then he would take up his wife's threat
again, and the wrinkles and moisture would return.

In the morning he came over from the hotel and opened his mail, but
there was nothing in it outside the ordinary run. For some reason he
felt as if something might come that way, and was relieved when all the
envelopes had been scanned and nothing suspicious noticed. He began
to feel the appetite that had been wanting before he had reached the
office, and decided before going out to the park to meet Carrie to drop
in at the Grand Pacific and have a pot of coffee and some rolls. While
the danger had not lessened, it had not as yet materialised, and with
him no news was good news. If he could only get plenty of time to think,
perhaps something would turn up. Surely, surely, this thing would not
drift along to catastrophe and he not find a way out.

His spirits fell, however, when, upon reaching the park, he waited and
waited and Carrie did not come. He held his favourite post for an hour
or more, then arose and began to walk about restlessly. Could something
have happened out there to keep her away? Could she have been reached
by his wife? Surely not. So little did he consider Drouet that it never
once occurred to him to worry about his finding out. He grew restless as
he ruminated, and then decided that perhaps it was nothing. She had not
been able to get away this morning. That was why no letter notifying him
had come. He would get one to-day. It would probably be on his desk when
he got back. He would look for it at once.

After a time he gave up waiting and drearily headed for the Madison car.
To add to his distress, the bright blue sky became overcast with little
fleecy clouds which shut out the sun. The wind veered to the east, and
by the time he reached his office it was threatening to drizzle all
afternoon.

He went in and examined his letters, but there was nothing from Carrie.
Fortunately, there was nothing from his wife either. He thanked his
stars that he did not have to confront that proposition just now when he
needed to think so much. He walked the floor again, pretending to be in
an ordinary mood, but secretly troubled beyond the expression of words.

At one-thirty he went to Rector's for lunch, and when he returned a
messenger was waiting for him. He looked at the little chap with a
feeling of doubt.

"I'm to bring an answer," said the boy.

Hurstwood recognised his wife's writing. He tore it open and read
without a show of feeling. It began in the most formal manner and was
sharply and coldly worded throughout.

"I want you to send the money I asked for at once. I need it to carry
out my plans. You can stay away if you want to. It doesn't matter in the
least. But I must have some money. So don't delay, but send it by the
boy."

When he had finished it, he stood holding it in his hands. The audacity
of the thing took his breath. It roused his ire also--the deepest
element of revolt in him. His first impulse was to write but four words
in reply--"Go to the devil!"--but he compromised by telling the boy that
there would be no reply. Then he sat down in his chair and gazed without
seeing, contemplating the result of his work. What would she do about
that? The confounded wretch! Was she going to try to bulldoze him into
submission? He would go up there and have it out with her, that's what
he would do. She was carrying things with too high a hand. These were
his first thoughts.

Later, however, his old discretion asserted itself. Something had to
be done. A climax was near and she would not sit idle. He knew her well
enough to know that when she had decided upon a plan she would follow it
up. Possibly matters would go into a lawyer's hands at once.

"Damn her!" he said softly, with his teeth firmly set, "I'll make it
hot for her if she causes me trouble. I'll make her change her tone if I
have to use force to do it!"

He arose from his chair and went and looked out into the street. The
long drizzle had begun. Pedestrians had turned up collars, and trousers
at the bottom. Hands were hidden in the pockets of the umbrellaless;
umbrellas were up. The street looked like a sea of round black cloth
roofs, twisting, bobbing, moving. Trucks and vans were rattling in a
noisy line and everywhere men were shielding themselves as best they
could. He scarcely noticed the picture. He was forever confronting
his wife, demanding of her to change her attitude toward him before he
worked her bodily harm.

At four o'clock another note came, which simply said that if the
money was not forthcoming that evening the matter would be laid before
Fitzgerald and Moy on the morrow, and other steps would be taken to get
it.

Hurstwood almost exclaimed out loud at the insistency of this thing.
Yes, he would send her the money. He'd take it to her--he would go up
there and have a talk with her, and that at once.

He put on his hat and looked around for his umbrella. He would have some
arrangement of this thing.

He called a cab and was driven through the dreary rain to the North
Side. On the way his temper cooled as he thought of the details of the
case. What did she know? What had she done? Maybe she'd got hold of
Carrie, who knows--or--or Drouet. Perhaps she really had evidence, and
was prepared to fell him as a man does another from secret ambush.
She was shrewd. Why should she taunt him this way unless she had good
grounds?

He began to wish that he had compromised in some way or other--that he
had sent the money. Perhaps he could do it up here. He would go in and
see, anyhow. He would have no row. By the time he reached his own street
he was keenly alive to the difficulties of his situation and wished over
and over that some solution would offer itself, that he could see his
way out. He alighted and went up the steps to the front door, but it was
with a nervous palpitation of the heart. He pulled out his key and tried
to insert it, but another key was on the inside. He shook at the knob,
but the door was locked. Then he rang the bell. No answer. He rang
again--this time harder. Still no answer. He jangled it fiercely several
times in succession, but without avail. Then he went below.

There was a door which opened under the steps into the kitchen,
protected by an iron grating, intended as a safeguard against burglars.
When he reached this he noticed that it also was bolted and that the
kitchen windows were down. What could it mean? He rang the bell and then
waited. Finally, seeing that no one was coming, he turned and went back
to his cab.

"I guess they've gone out," he said apologetically to the individual who
was hiding his red face in a loose tarpaulin raincoat.

"I saw a young girl up in that winder," returned the cabby.

Hurstwood looked, but there was no face there now. He climbed moodily
into the cab, relieved and distressed.

So this was the game, was it? Shut him out and make him pay. Well, by
the Lord, that did beat all!


