{"name": "Chapter 15", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416215230/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmWuthering40.asp", "summary": "Another week passes in Lockwood's life, and his health is improving. He asks Nelly to continue her story of the characters surrounding Wuthering Heights. She begins her tale again by revealing that she manages to give the letter from Heathcliff to her mistress while Edgar and the other servants are at church. Catherine is too sick to understand the letter by herself, so Nelly explains that Heathcliff is waiting to see her. When Catherine agrees, Heathcliff enters and clasps her in his arms. The couple has a long conversation, kiss, and expresses eternal love for each other. Edgar comes home and is enraged to find the uninvited guest. Heathcliff prevents a scene by thrusting the now unconscious Catherine into Edgar's arms and begging him to help her. Heathcliff leaves the room and waits in the garden to find out if Catherine's health is improving.", "analysis": "Notes This is an intensely passionate chapter, one that makes the novel unforgettable. The depth of Heathcliff's love for Cathy is clearly seen. He takes a great risk in coming to the Grange, but he feels he must see the ailing woman that he loves. He holds her in his arms, and they declare their undying love for each other. It marks the climax of the tumultuous relationship between Cathy and Heathcliff. The long conversation between Catherine and Heathcliff indicates how closely connected they are in mind and soul. When Heathcliff takes her in his arms, she first kisses him, and then he starts showering kisses on her. They finally express the passion for one another that they have felt for so long. Now that she has seen her true love and mended their relationship, Catherine is now ready to face death; she does not believe that dying will separate her forever from Heathcliff. Edgar returns home from church while Heathcliff is still at Thrushcross Grange. It is not surprising that he is enraged to find him there. The only thing that prevents a real scene between them is their mutual concern for the now unconscious Catherine."}