{"name": "volume 3, Chapter 49", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210419020931/http://www.gradesaver.com/emma/study-guide/summary-chapters-43-49", "summary": "Mr. Knightley stops by Hartfield to see Emma, and they discuss Frank Churchill and Jane Fairfax. He fears that Jane will be miserable with a man as intolerable as Frank Churchill but hopes that she will improve him. Mr. Knightley admits that he envies Frank in one respect. Emma fears that he will mention Harriet, but Mr. Knightley then professes his love for Emma. The two are now reassured of their love for one another.", "analysis": "The final decision on Frank Churchill's actions comes when Emma discusses his engagement with Mr. Knightley. While Mr. Knightley has always held a low opinion of Frank Churchill out of jealousy for his apparent affection for Emma, he now realizes how he underrated him. Mr. Knightley serves as the final judge of character in the novel, and, when he comes to forgive Frank Churchill this is a cue from Austen that Frank, for all of his faults, should not be considered disreputable. Once again, manners and etiquette obscure the true emotions and cause dangerous mixed signals. The great propriety that Emma shows in dealing with Frank Churchill makes it unclear what feelings she may have. Mr. Knightley from this concluded that she might be in love with Frank. It is necessary to discern what each character does or does not feel under the heavy veil of polite behavior. In believing that Emma might love Frank, Mr. Knightley made his one major error. Mr. Knightley professes love in a measured and utterly dignified manner that is very different from the fawning adoration that Mr. Elton showered upon Emma in the carriage ride. When he and Emma declare their love for one another, it is occasion for relief, rather than for abundant joy. Austen suggests that a match between the two was inevitable as they are the two highest members of Highbury society. Moreover, Mr. Knightley's criticisms of her were merely preparation for making her a suitable wife"}