{"name": "book 5, Chapter 40", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210124224836/https://www.sparknotes.com/lit/adambede/section10/", "summary": "Mr. Irwine returns to Hayslope and learns that the Squire has died in the night. At Stoniton, Adam stays to be close to Hetty, even though he cannot bear to visit her. Adam's family and the Poysers are told the news about Hetty from Mr. Irwine. Mr. Poyser is deeply shamed and has no compassion for Hetty, whereas Mrs. Poyser feels sorry for her. They both agree that they want Dinah to come visit to help them deal with the grief. Lisbeth also wants Dinah to come and help and asks Seth to write to Dinah in Leeds. Seth does not know exactly where in Leeds Dinah is but gives what information he has to the Poysers, who send a letter to Dinah. Mr. Massey goes to see Mr. Irwine and asks what he thinks about the case against Hetty. Mr. Irwine says the case against Hetty does not look good, especially since Hetty denies ever having been pregnant when there is evidence against her. When Mr. Massey decides to go stay with Adam in Stoniton, Mr. Irwine warns him to be gentle and not to say anything too harsh about Hetty. Mr. Massey says he will be compassionate and tells Mr. Irwine that he himself was in trouble once, but he does not specify how", "analysis": "In this section, the focus is almost entirely on Adam's despair, nearly to the complete exclusion of Hetty's situation. Because this novel is mostly about Adam and not Hetty, the story centers on his ability to cope with sorrow. Until Adam goes to the courtroom to watch the trial, Hetty is physically absent from the action of this part of the novel. Although she is ever-present through Adam's obsession with her well-being, her own thoughts and feelings about her trial are really not important here. Everyone at the trial notices Adam, and the reader is meant to notice him as well. Hetty will make a brief but important appearance when Dinah goes to visit her in jail and effect her conversion, but even then, Dinah will be the focus of that scene, not Hetty. Instead, Eliot focuses on Adam and the destruction of his personality. Hetty is less important to the novel now, perhaps, because she is less moral and less good. The novel is about how a good man deals with everyday life and then with extraordinary circumstances. Hetty represents an extreme because she is so deeply selfish. Adam, by contrast, is someone the reader can emulate, and that may be why Eliot focuses on him. Adam's destruction in this section is near complete when Mr. Massey explains the trial. Adam's personal appearance is failing in this section, and for a few chapters it seems that his courage wavers. He cannot bring himself to go visit Hetty, even though he believes that it would be the right thing to do. This Adam is a very different man from the one who once told Captain Donnithorne that he would never do something that was evil once he had decided it was the wrong thing to do. Adam here suffers, perhaps even to excess. After all, it is not his child who was killed, and Hetty was his fiancee, but not his wife and not someone he even knew well. What motivates Adam's near total collapse is his sense of how useless this evil is, how unstoppably it progresses toward Hetty's death, and how impotent he is in the face of such evil. Adam is overwhelmed by the situation because his conception of right and wrong has changed. This is not to say that Adam is not also very much motivated by sympathy for Hetty and by his sense that everyone else has abandoned her. But the rabid nature of his anger and the depths to which he is affected stem from his sense that the ground is slipping away from beneath him. Adam is a man of action, and action does no good in this situation. The right thing no longer exists, and he flounders in a world where all his strength cannot prevent the destruction of his loved one. The novel at this point becomes its most multifarious and complicated. The narration suddenly comes through several characters who are new to the novel and about whom the reader knows almost nothing. The story of the death of Hetty's child comes through witnesses at a trial, and in some places then through the filter of Mr. Massey as he retells it to Adam. This section also contains a major change of scene. The characters have left Hayslope and are staying in Stoniton, a town about which Eliot tells the reader very little other than that it is bustling. The action takes place in a room that is very different from the usual farmhouses and meadows where the rest of the action of the novel takes place. The effect of these changes is to throw the reader off balance, just as Adam, who remains the focal point, is off balance. These scenes and this story seem as strange to the reader as they do to him because they are so unlike the rest of the book. The peaceful tranquility and easy rhythm of the rest of the story are gone, and horrifying events have taken their place. It only makes sense, then, that the scenery and narration style should also change."}