{"name": "Chapter 23", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416023755/https://www.gradesaver.com/kidnapped/study-guide/summary-chapters-21-25", "summary": "Cluny lived in a dwelling called the Cage because of its construction into the side of the mountain behind a wall of trees, dirt, and rocks. It was hidden from view like a wasp's nest. Cluny greeted them in drab, simple wear but with the poise of royalty. He kindly accepted the men into his home. The Cage was quite comfortable considering its elements and Cluny spoke of his entertaining Prince Charles of France at one point. The Cage was one of many hiding places in the countryside for Cluny. His clansmen still held him as an authority and protected him at all costs. Cluny was rather particular in his home due to the large amount of time he spent alone. He was visited by his wife or friends occasionally but not often. Daily, his servants gave him the news of the country which he devoured greedily. David was interested in seeing the inner workings of a Highland clan, though he certainly felt out of place as well. Given some luxuries, Cluny squeezed lemon on the venison he served to David and Alan. Worn out, David could eat very little. After finishing the meal, Cluny took out an old deck of cards. David could have used his fatigue as an excuse but felt like he should speak his mind. He told them that he did not think it was right to play cards and so, he would rather not. The chief gasped but Alan tried to explain that though David was a Whig, he was a good boy and should be allowed to rest. David confirmed his exhaustion and explained that he was following his father's wishes. Cluny agreed but often looked his way in disgust. David was shown to a bed of heather. As soon as he lay upon it, he fell into a feverish sleep. He came to several times during the next couple of days but remembered little and barely gained consciousness. He did notice that Cluny and Alan played cards for several days and that Alan appeared to be losing after the second day. When Alan asked him for money, he was too ill to refuse. On the third day, David finally came to his senses and was able to rise and step outside. Cluny spoke to him in Gaelic when he returned. David had to admit he did not understand. Annoyed, Cluny asked if he had the strength to move on. David mentioned their little money and Alan was forced to admit that he had lost both of their purses. The chief mumbled that he would certainly not take their money. Alan looked down in humiliation. David took the chief aside and asked what he should do since neither option allowed any of the three to retain his pride. David voiced that he had been correct in thinking that gambling was dangerous. Though angered, Cluny returned the money to David and shook his hand.", "analysis": "Cluny's cage is a highly symbolic dwelling. We have been looking at \"the problems of the body and of the practical intelligence, in clean, open-air adventure\" as well as the themes of Scottish duality and man versus nature. Critics have described Kidnapped has a largely visual novel. The adventures are mainly physical and take us through a variety of overtly described landscapes. The scapes change drastically, though within the limits of the Scottish scope, from rural Lowland kirk to large, foreboding residence to ship at sea to deserted isle to wild, weather beaten Highlands. Though the natural landscape does not dominate to the extent that it takes on the personality of a full-fledged character, it certainly affects the sensibilities of the heroes and often strips them to the base of their duality. The attention that Stevenson pays to geography is clear from the map placed at the beginning of the novel and the specific references to landmarks. However, he also seems to enjoy the use of geography and visual stimulation as a decorative and illustrative function of style, leading the reader through a sensory filled journey which can be read and experienced. The characters do often play second fiddle to this elaborative writing style and thus we must give the Cage a proper look. Time nearly stops for the narrator once inside the Cage. David falls ill from fever and is barely conscious for a span of three days. During this time, the reader knows little of what goes on beyond Alan and Cluny's card game and Alan's selfish plea for money. It is almost as if David has fallen into the hole to Wonderland. He comments that his vision becomes distorted from the fever and his visual sense is thus demented. The text states, \"Alan had stooped over the bed, and had his face close to my eyes; to which troubled as they were with the fever, it seemed of the most shocking bigness. Only because David is disoriented and feverish does he agree to give Alan his money. Alan however is under no contract to continue playing cards, as far as we know, and could have likely quit once his own money was lost. Alan's lack of reason, it seems, has grown with David's illness. Within the Cage, as nature and man are largely kept out of the interior of the structure, the life that does come inside is largely exaggerated. David lies motionless, without agency. His practical sense is deadened. Alan, overcome by his romantic zeal and with little sense of responsibility, plays to the point that he loses all of their money. The environment of the Cage is a psychological metaphor for the role each hero plays in Stevenson's use of the doppleganger. David notices, \"I was conscious of no particular nightmare, only of a general, black, abiding horror - a horror of the place I was in, and the bed I lay in, and the plaids on the wall, and the voices, and the fire, and myself. For David, the Cage is a Highlander hell which entraps him and inflates the faults of the self. Once he reaches the open-air on the third day, he can finally begin to piece together the irrational mistakes made by Alan"}