{"name": "Chapter 12", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416023755/https://www.gradesaver.com/kidnapped/study-guide/summary-chapters-11-15", "summary": "Soon, the breeze blew off the rain and the sun came out. The ship's course was decided by Hoseason who feared that the boat may be too large to navigate between the smaller isles. Thus, they drove south hoping to come up to Linnhe Loch around the southern coast of the Isle of Mull. Alan and David sat pleasantly in the round-house with doors open so the breeze could blow right through. They smoked pipes and told their stories to each other. David hoped to hear about Alan in order to know what to expect from the Scotland he would soon land upon. Alan was a good listener of David's story until he heard David mention the minister, Mr. Campbell. The name alerted a hatred in Alan who explained that the Campbell family was his worst enemy. He claimed the family had cheated, tricked, and robbed his clan for years, doing the greatest harm after the Jacobite defeat in 1746. Alan spoke also of his father. His father was the first man, Alan claimed proudly, to tip the King's porter. Yet, his generosity left Alan poor which is why he joined the English army. However, at the battle at Preston Pans, he deserted his army and joined the Jacobites. David realized that his desertion was punishable by death. David could not understand why a man who had deserted the English army and worked for the French King would reenter Scotland. Alan explained that he missed his land, family, and friends. Also, he needed to recruit men to serve the King of France. Journeying back into Appin was not very difficult. He could hide with friends or in the heather because the English could not cover all of the Highlands. Moreover, the Highlands were considered pacified five years after the defeat. However, Alan explained that King George demanded rent from the Highlands he had conquered in 1746, an endeavor which was aided by Colin Campbell who was put in charge of the area. The clan chief, Ardshiel, had to flee to France where the people of Appin continued to send him a rent in addition to giving the rent King George demanded. David thought this noble, pleasing Alan. He helped transport the rent from one side of the English Channel to the other, pointing to his belt of gold. Alan further exclaimed how the man referred to as the Red Fox, Colin Campbell, decided to take less rent in order to starve Ardshiel. Here David added that if the Red Fox took less rent than the government must have a hand in the process. But Alan seemed angered so David changed the subject. In addition to these great stories, David learned that his friend was a talented piper, poet, fencer, and angler. Moreover, Alan was a man who liked to pick quarrels, though he rarely fought with David because of their time together in the round-house.", "analysis": "Near the beginning of this chapter, Stevenson writes, \"And here I must explain; and the reader would do well to look at a map. The author is working to establish that the story is based in factual events and geography. As opposed to Treasure Island where Stevenson creates a fictitious surrounding, Kidnapped exhibits more validity since he grounds the adventures in landmarks that any reader can find on the map that he has provided in the book. By beginning the chapter with such a solid geographical foothold, Stevenson effectively adds a greater veracity to the stories which are to follow. As the brig is navigated through the tricky waters around the Isle of Canna and so forth, David learns a brief history of Alan's part in the Rebellion of 1746 and the role in Scotland which he and his clan play presently. The bad weather clears, and during the storytelling, the sun and a slight breeze delight David and Alan. The stage is set therefore by the weather and the factual information for Alan's story. Characteristic of David, his reason for wanting to hear Alan's story is based in a rational and practical desire to prepare himself for the Scottish Highlands. As he mentions, \"In those days, so close on the back of the great rebellion, it was needful a man should know what he was doing when he went upon the heather. Heather is a metonym for the wild Highlands, representing the rough and savage character of the land and people themselves. David wanted to prepare for the savage life he worried that he may encounter. David is impressed by the pride and honor with which Alan gives his story. He is not only proud to talk about his chief and the two taxes that he helps transport but gives a story about his father being the first to tip the King's porter. This detail is rather inconsequential but Alan does not work on a basis of logic. He simply wants David to know what a great man his father was. Yet, note that during the Rebellion, Alan first fought on the side of King George before he deserted to the Jacobite side at the battle of Preston Pans. The reason why he first fought on the Hanoverian side is never given, but we do learn that Alan was not originally loyal to the Jacobite cause. Stevenson is thus able to provide a greater complexity to Alan's character and to illustrate that one cannot know everything about a Scotsman by knowing that he is a Highlander or Lowlander. This extends the mixing of sensibilities which was established by describing Hoseason as a strictly religious Presbyterian"}