{"name": "Chapter 27", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210416023755/https://www.gradesaver.com/kidnapped/study-guide/summary-chapters-26-30", "summary": "The next day, they decided that Alan would fend for himself during the day and, at night, wait in the fields until David whistled a chosen tune. David then proceeded to search for Mr. Rankeillor. Every time he came near asking for directions, however, he was too embarrassed over his clothing and could not. He also realized that he had no proof of his identity or of his travels and wondered whether Rankeillor would even allow him to speak. Yet, if he did not find help, he and Alan would likely be hanged. David wandered in front of a large house with a dog out front. He envied the dog, lazy and carefree. While David was staring, a man exited the house and came toward David. David gathered his nerves and asked the man for directions to Mr. Rankeillor. As luck would have it, the man was Mr. Rankeillor. David asked for an interview and Rankeillor asked for his name. After hearing David's name, Rankeillor looked at David strangely so David explained that he had been many places of which would be best to speak of in privacy. Rankeillor thought it over and then let David into his home. Inside, Rankeillor asked David to keep his story brief, throwing in a Latin phrase as a test. He was pleased that David understood him. David began by stating that he was the rightful heir to the Shaws. He had trouble continuing so Rankeillor asked him questions about his upbringing and the meetings he had with his uncle Ebenezer and Captain Hoseason. Rankeillor then noted that David's story fit with what details Rankeillor knew. Before telling more, David asked if he could trust Rankeillor, who replied that he could not say until he had heard the story. However, he then continued to explain that Mr. Campbell had visited Rankeillor, looking for David. This brought Rankeillor to visit Ebenezer, who admitted that he had seen David but said he had given him a large sum of money. Ebenezer then claimed David had gone to Europe to continue his studies. Rankeillor and Campbell doubted the story but had no proof until Hoseason returned with stories of David's drowning. Rankeillor broke relations with Ebenezer and Campbell became very concerned. At this point, David proceeded with the remainder of his story, asking for Rankeillor's word of secrecy. Rankeillor agreed conditionally but when Alan's name came up, told David to use the alias Mr. Thomson. He likely recognized Alan's name in conjunction with the murder of Red Fox. David agreed to the farce and substituted different names for all of the Highlander characters he discussed. After the story was completed, Rankeillor moralized the adventures, mentioning that he did not approve totally of \"Mr. Thomson\" but understood his companionship with David. David was grateful for Rankeillor's civilized company. However, he was still embarrassed when he looked at his own clothing. Noticing, Rankeillor invited him to dinner, gave him a change of clothes, and allowed him to wash.", "analysis": "Much of this chapter details storytelling which is always interesting within a story because it is self-referential. David tells his story to Mr. Rankeillor. He has also told it over the course of the novel to Mr. Riach and to Alan. Each time, of course, it grows because more of the adventure has taken place and each time the story is told for a different purpose and so likely different aspects are highlighted in the telling. We are never really given the report of the story, only that the story was told. Thus we are told that there was story-telling but never shown, as usually signifies good writing style. Still, the reader does learn of a few points within David's story which he must stress or change, highlighting important issues to analyze. The greatest change which occurs in this latest version of the story is the changing of Alan's name to an alias, Mr. Thompson. Name changing is always an event which a good reader should pay attention to as it normally is significant. Rankeillor gives Alan a different name in order to avoid being responsible to the law for any crime that Alan has committed. Mr. Thompson is a Lowlander surname, which David comments upon. Rankeillor is smoothing over the separation which was symbolized by the bridge, the gap between Highlander and Lowlander as well as the gap between their representative sensibilities. Thus the alias becomes a metaphor for the attempt to change Highlander qualities into Lowlander ones. Rankeillor feels that Alan will be safer under this alias and it will allow them to communicate. Thus, in effect, the alias allows for a bridge between the Lowlander, Rankeillor, and the Highlander, Alan, which would not have been possible otherwise. Yet, it also shows that communication between the two cultures was only possible if one was made into the other. Before meeting with Rankeillor, David is embarrassed by his appearance. He stands staring at a dog for a period, admiring its lifestyle. He wishes that he were that dog, lying and relaxing, totally content. David transfers his desires onto the dog directly before Rankeillor arrives. Likely David would not have been standing in front of Rankeillor's house for such a long time if it had not been for the dog. Thus the dog links David back to the civilized Lowlander lifestyle for which he had been wishing. The dog functions as a vehicle for David's desire and need through which David is able to gather the courage to ask the man for directions to Mr. Rankeillor. Yet, although David speaks with Mr. Rankeillor and gains his trust, he does not feel like himself again until he is given a fresh change of clothes. Thus we see again how significant appearances and clothing are within this novel. The clothing is a synecdoche for the type of man David wants to be: a respected, civilized Lowlander"}