{"name": "Chapter 16", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180410182628/http://www.gradesaver.com/the-marrow-of-tradition/study-guide/summary-chapters-16-20", "summary": "One afternoon, Clara, Major Carteret, Mrs. Carteret, and Ellis all take a trip to the seashore for dinner at a hotel with Tom Delamere. Major Carteret has a fondness for Ellis because of his sharp wit and Mrs. Carteret senses his fondness for Clara, but chooses not to interfere with her love life. On the road, they pass through several toll roads looked over by the \"poor whites\" of the countryside. Several decades before, Wellington had hosted a booming naval export business, but recent times had left the town's economy faltering. This left many whites without decent income and reliant upon cotton for their livelihoods. The group also passes several groups of black persons; some are gathered in groups, laughing boisterously while others are more solemn and deferential to the carriage. Major Carteret thoughtfully remarks, \"They will learn their lesson in a rude school, and perhaps much sooner than they dream. When the group arrives at the hotel, Tom Delamere is not present. They sit down for dinner and Ellis feels the discomfort of Clara's indifference towards him. He despises Delamere and \"but for his engagement to Clara, he would have held his opinions in utter contempt. He takes heart only in the fact that Clara seems to ignore him, meaning that she actually has kept him in mind and made him \"the subject of strong emotions. Clara asks Ellis to inquire with the hotel staff as to Delamere's whereabouts and he reluctantly accepts the job. On the advice of a porter, Ellis goes upstairs and finds Tom Delamere passed out, sleeping and drunk, in a hotel room with several other young men who are playing cards. Not wanting to embarrass Clara, Ellis returns to the table and tells them all that Tom has not arrived. Now bored, Clara decides to go upstairs and play the piano. Ellis makes the snap decision to send the bellboy up to close the hotel room door where Delamere is passed out, saving both him and Clara the embarrassment. Ellis and Clara then take a walk on the beach, though she is distant to him because of her anger at Tom's disappearance. While they are on the beach, Tom wakes up and freshens himself enough to make an appearance at dinner, telling everyone that he suffered heat exhaustion that afternoon and had been lying down. Clara then tells Ellis that she wants to see the fires on the beach and leaves with him, not inviting Tom to join them. On the beach, Clara interrogates Ellis as to whether he knew Tom was in the hotel and if he was truly sick. Ellis avoids answering which gives Clara the only answer she needs. On the trip home, she is cold to Tom Delamere, but strangely warm to Ellis. When they return to Wellington, she invites Ellis to come by the house anytime but does not say a word to Delamere", "analysis": "Chesnutt continues this theme of economic justice in the next chapter focusing on Captain McBane. In Southern hierarchy, the slave drivers and poor whites of the antebellum South have retained few rights and those that they did have come only because of race. McBane represents this crude class of poor white Southerners who, by the fortune of capitalism, was able to pull himself into respectable society. Chesnutt uses an aside by his narrator in Chapter Seventeen to reveal to the reader McBane's true feelings and aspirations -- just as McBane seeks to attack the black community, he also plans to \"assault society in its citadel\" by seeking to become a member at the Clarendon Club. That Tom Delamere speaks on his behalf is only a demonstration of the decline of white aristocracy from its principles and its past. The narrative of Sandy's false imprisonment and near lynching in the book's middle chapters is a sub-plot of the novel's larger narrative. Chesnutt has been slowly building up this sub-plot, with Sandy's dismissal from the Methodist Church and Delamere's gambling problems as the crises leading to the murder of Mrs. Ochiltree. This sub-plot foreshadows the riot that will take place in the novel's closing chapters. It also involves several characters that will prove pivotal during the riot, most importantly Josh Green. Chesnutt uses this sub-plot to illustrate the common practice of false accusations that often led to the lynchings of black men. Though Polly Ochiltree is a despised woman, Chesnutt demonstrates how the town's white males will use her murder and alleged rape to persecute a black man -- any black man -- as a defense of feminine honor. Chesnutt suggests that Southern white culture used female sexuality as a veil to disguise their racial hatred and contempt. This also ties into laws of mixed marriage and mixed race children, which were considered impure. Chesnutt argues that racial purity is a delusion of hatred, not of honor. This \"shocking crime\" is the basis for a proposed lynching. Lynching was a crime committed by white mobs throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries against black men and, sometimes, women. The black person would be accused of a crime, often rape, and the mob would carry out a violent act of justice, usually hanging or burning at the stake, as a way to punish the criminal. The act, however, was actually meant as a mode of violent oppression and warning to the black community. The Marrow of Tradition can be seen as an argument through storytelling against the practice of lynching. According to Chesnutt, lynching is a misuse of justice because it undermines the democratic legal proceedings upheld by the public. It is a perversion of justice meant not to keep order but to subject a people to an unjust order of racial domination."}