{"name": "Chapter 27", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820035817/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmKidnapped35.asp", "summary": "On reaching land, David walks towards Queensferry to go the residence of Mr. Rankeillor, his attorney. In the meantime, Alan hides himself in the fields by the roadside. David meets the lawyer, who inquires about his birth and parentage before inviting him to dine with him. Mr. Rankeillor hears the boy's tales of adventure and calls it a 'great odyssey'.", "analysis": "Notes With Alan's help, David comes back to his hometown to claim his inheritance. Looking disheveled and ragged, he is unsure about convincing the lawyer of his identity. Mr. Rankeillor, however, gives him the opportunity to prove who he is and listens to his tales of adventure patiently. The attorney proves to be an interesting character who wins the heart of David through his kindness and understanding. He is also a shrewd lawyer who gets the necessary information from David to ascertain his identity. His eccentricity adds life to his character and introduces another touch of humor into the novel. The chapter again proves the nobility, generosity, and sincerity of Alan. He has spent months with David risking his life to help him to get back to Queensferry so that he can reclaim his identity and his inheritance. While David goes to town, Alan patiently waits for his friend, hiding himself in the fields. CHAPTER 28: I Go in Quest of my Inheritance Summary After David washes up, Mr. Rankeillor tells him the story of the two brothers, David's father and uncle. Mr. Ebenezer had been a gallant youth, who ran away from home to join the rebels in 1715. It was his brother, Alexander, who brought him back. Later, both the brothers fell in love with the same girl. When the girl chose Alexander, Ebenezer was given the estate as compensation; but the land was eventually to go to Alexander's heirs; therefore, the property rightfully belongs to David. David explains to Mr. Rankeillor his plan of entrapping his uncle with the help of Alan. After meeting Alan and gaining his cooperation, the three of them, joined by Rankeillor's servant Torrance, proceed towards the House of Shaws. While David, Rankeillor, and Torrance hide in a corner of the house, Alan goes forward to knock at the front door. Notes David at last learns of the animosity between his father and his uncle. He also verifies with the attorney that he is the rightful inheritor of the House of Shaws. Mr. Rankeillor proves himself to be a clever man. Since he wants to help David but is reluctant to associate himself with the renegade Alan, he pretends to be half- blind without his spectacles and is consequently unable to recognize the outlaw. The chapter prepares the reader for action and excitement as they go to confront Ebenezer at the House of Shaws. The plan for his entrapment is laid and suspense is created. Stevenson is a master at inventing such situations that arouse the reader's curiosity."}