
Thomasin Walks in a Green Place by the Roman Road


Clym saw little of Thomasin for several days after this; and when they
met she was more silent than usual. At length he asked her what she
was thinking of so intently.

"I am thoroughly perplexed," she said candidly. "I cannot for my life
think who it is that Diggory Venn is so much in love with. None of
the girls at the Maypole were good enough for him, and yet she must
have been there."

Clym tried to imagine Venn's choice for a moment; but ceasing to be
interested in the question he went on again with his gardening.

No clearing up of the mystery was granted her for some time. But one
afternoon Thomasin was upstairs getting ready for a walk, when she had
occasion to come to the landing and call "Rachel." Rachel was a girl
about thirteen, who carried the baby out for airings; and she came
upstairs at the call.

"Have you seen one of my last new gloves about the house, Rachel?"
inquired Thomasin. "It is the fellow to this one."

Rachel did not reply.

"Why don't you answer?" said her mistress.

"I think it is lost, ma'am."

"Lost? Who lost it? I have never worn them but once."

Rachel appeared as one dreadfully troubled, and at last began to cry.
"Please, ma'am, on the day of the Maypole I had none to wear, and I
seed yours on the table, and I thought I would borrow 'em. I did not
mean to hurt 'em at all, but one of them got lost. Somebody gave me
some money to buy another pair for you, but I have not been able to
go anywhere to get 'em."

"Who's somebody?"

"Mr. Venn."

"Did he know it was my glove?"

"Yes. I told him."

Thomasin was so surprised by the explanation that she quite forgot
to lecture the girl, who glided silently away. Thomasin did not move
further than to turn her eyes upon the grass-plat where the Maypole
had stood. She remained thinking, then said to herself that she
would not go out that afternoon, but would work hard at the baby's
unfinished lovely plaid frock, cut on the cross in the newest fashion.
How she managed to work hard, and yet do no more than she had done at
the end of two hours, would have been a mystery to anyone not aware
that the recent incident was of a kind likely to divert her industry
from a manual to a mental channel.

Next day she went her ways as usual, and continued her custom of
walking in the heath with no other companion than little Eustacia, now
of the age when it is a matter of doubt with such characters whether
they are intended to walk through the world on their hands or on their
feet; so that they get into painful complications by trying both. It
was very pleasant to Thomasin, when she had carried the child to some
lonely place, to give her a little private practice on the green turf
and shepherd's-thyme, which formed a soft mat to fall headlong upon
when equilibrium was lost.

Once, when engaged in this system of training, and stooping to remove
bits of stick, fern-stalks, and other such fragments from the child's
path, that the journey might not be brought to an untimely end by some
insuperable barrier a quarter of an inch high, she was alarmed by
discovering that a man on horseback was almost close beside her, the
soft natural carpet having muffled the horse's tread. The rider, who
was Venn, waved his hat in the air and bowed gallantly.

"Diggory, give me my glove," said Thomasin, whose manner it was under
any circumstances to plunge into the midst of a subject which
engrossed her.

Venn immediately dismounted, put his hand in his breastpocket, and
handed the glove.

"Thank you. It was very good of you to take care of it."

"It is very good of you to say so."

"O no. I was quite glad to find you had it. Everybody gets so
indifferent that I was surprised to know you thought of me."

"If you had remembered what I was once you wouldn't have been
surprised."

"Ah, no," she said quickly. "But men of your character are mostly so
independent."

"What is my character?" he asked.

"I don't exactly know," said Thomasin simply, "except it is to cover
up your feelings under a practical manner, and only to show them when
you are alone."

"Ah, how do you know that?" said Venn strategically.

"Because," said she, stopping to put the little girl, who had managed
to get herself upside down, right end up again, "because I do."

"You mustn't judge by folks in general," said Venn. "Still I don't
know much what feelings are now-a-days. I have got so mixed up with
business of one sort and t'other that my soft sentiments are gone off
in vapour like. Yes, I am given up body and soul to the making of
money. Money is all my dream."

"O Diggory, how wicked!" said Thomasin reproachfully, and looking at
him in exact balance between taking his words seriously and judging
them as said to tease her.

"Yes, 'tis rather a rum course," said Venn, in the bland tone of one
comfortably resigned to sins he could no longer overcome.

"You, who used to be so nice!"

"Well, that's an argument I rather like, because what a man has once
been he may be again." Thomasin blushed. "Except that it is rather
harder now," Venn continued.

"Why?" she asked.

"Because you be richer than you were at that time."

"O no--not much. I have made it nearly all over to the baby, as it
was my duty to do, except just enough to live on."

"I am rather glad of that," said Venn softly, and regarding her from
the corner of his eye, "for it makes it easier for us to be friendly."

Thomasin blushed again, and, when a few more words had been said of a
not unpleasing kind, Venn mounted his horse and rode on.

This conversation had passed in a hollow of the heath near the old
Roman road, a place much frequented by Thomasin. And it might have
been observed that she did not in future walk that way less often from
having met Venn there now. Whether or not Venn abstained from riding
thither because he had met Thomasin in the same place might easily
have been guessed from her proceedings about two months later in the
same year.



