{"name": "Chapter 5", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180325141142/http://www.gradesaver.com/what-maisie-knew/study-guide/summary-chapters-1-6", "summary": "Compared to being separated from Miss Overmore, Maisie is even more devastated to be separated from Mrs. Wix when it is time to return to her father's house. To underscore the pain of the separation, the author uses a vivid extended metaphor comparing Maisie's extraction from Mrs. Wix's care to a recent dentist visit in which Maisie had a tooth pulled. Beale comes to get Maisie in a fancy carriage, and Maisie is returned to Miss Overmore's care at her father's house. Maisie is aware that Miss Overmore had been staying at Beale's house all the time she was away, so she asks Miss Overmore, \"Did papa like you just the same while I was gone. Beale laughs loudly at this and responds, \"When you're away what have I left to do but just to love her. hinting at a budding relationship between the two. Miss Overmore responds that it is \"horrid\" for him to say this , which confuses Maisie, and she is further confused when Miss Overmore tries to explain that \"a lady couldn't stay with a gentleman that way without some awfully proper reason\". By the end of the conversation, Maisie feels embarrassed and bewildered at the vague answers as to where Miss Overmore had been staying; she does not like the feeling of being left in the dark. Maisie lets her frustration ebb as she gets to spend more time with Miss Overmore. Maisie is given a doll named Lisette that she treats very much like she is treated by her parents and governesses. For example, the author writes, \"There were. days when, after prolonged absence, Lisette, watching her take off her things, tried hard to discover where she had been. Well, she discovered a little, but never discovered all\". This parallels the way Maisie feels left out of her mother's affairs and Miss Overmore's stay with her father", "analysis": "Maisie is six when her parents divorce and begin sending her back and forth from house to house. This is a very impressionable age, and the emotional trauma she suffers affects her greatly. Importantly, James writes, \"She found in her mind a collection of images and echoes to which meanings were attachable--images and echoes kept for her in the childish dusk, the dim closet, the high drawers, like games she wasn't big enough to play...A wonderful assortment of objects of this kind she was to discover there later\" . This quote shows that the things Maisie witnessed during her parents' dysfunctional marriage and subsequent divorce will remain in her subconscious, affecting her feelings and decisions later in the book. James uses this metaphor to set up the moral of the story, which is that the way a child is raised, especially any neglect or trauma they suffer, will affect them greatly later in life. Further evidence of Maisie's trauma comes from the symbol of her doll Lisette. Maisie acts toward Lisette the way that her mother acts toward her, mimicking her mother's secretive and emotionally abusive behavior, particularly the way she would leave for long periods of time and be secretive about where she was going. Maisie's behavior toward Lisette demonstrates the effect of this treatment on Maisie's psyche. Her treatment of Lisette calls attention to the way parents can pass down behavior and traits to their children, especially those present during early childhood. From the beginning of the book, James challenges common perceptions about what constitutes a good mother. Maisie thinks to herself, \" had been, with passion and anguish, a mother, and...this was something Miss Overmore was not, something  that mamma was even less\" . This contradicts the belief that motherhood is fundamentally a biological relation. This quote, which occurs quite early in the book, also foreshadows Maisie's decision to live with Mrs. Wix rather than Ida or Miss Overmore in the last chapter of the story. Some important facts about Mrs. Wix are mentioned in this part of the book and then largely do not recur in the rest of the story. Specifically, she had a daughter named Clara Matilda and a husband who is unnamed. Both are said to have died, Clara Matilda in a carriage accident and the husband by unknown causes. It is likely, from the way that James describes Mrs. Wix's secretiveness and discomfort around the subject of her husband, that Mrs. Wix actually had Clara Matilda out of wedlock, which was quite scandalous at the time. Furthermore, while it is not mentioned over the course of the book, Mrs. Wix's grief over raising a child without a committed husband and then losing that child likely motivate her empathy for Maisie and her desire to live as a family with Maisie and Sir Claude. One example of irony in What Maisie Knew that is particularly present in this section is Maisie's precocious perceptiveness. For a child no older than eight or nine, she often notices and verbalizes things that surprise the adults around her, and in some cases she seems more aware than the adults themselves. For example, Maisie suggests that Sir Claude might become her tutor to make his relationship with Ida more proper. Maisie explains this to Miss Overmore by saying \"Mightn't that make it right--as right as your being my governess makes it for you to be with papa?\" . Miss Overmore blushes, showing that Maisie understands more than she expected about her relationship with Beale and Sir Claude's relationship with Ida. Maisie's idea even foreshadows Sir Claude's involvement in her education."}