{"name": "book 5, Chapter 38", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210804032318/https://www.gradesaver.com/adam-bede/study-guide/summary-book-fifth", "summary": "The ten days after Hetty leaves pass quietly at the farm, but after two weeks, everyone starts to worry. Adam decides to set out on Sunday to find her and to bring her home on Monday. Seth walks with Adam for the first two miles, saying that he will probably be a bachelor and fuss over Adam's children. Adam is so happy with thinking about Hetty that he feels almost reverent. He reaches Snowfield and finds the cottage where Dinah has lodged with an elderly couple. The old woman tells Adam that Dinah has gone on to Leeds. He is even more alarmed when she tells him that she has not seen Hetty. He inquires where the coach lets off, but nobody has seen Dinah and nothing has happened to the coach. Adam feels agonized by the thought that Dinah has realized that Hetty cannot love him. He wonders if Arthur has perhaps lured her away to Ireland. Adam tracks down the coachman who joked with Hetty, and the coachman tells him about the joke that did not make her laugh. Adam thinks that he will not betray her secret when he goes back to town in case she returns, but he might even follow Arthur to Ireland to see if he lured her there. It never occurs to him that Hetty would travel unbidden to Windsor, knowing as he does that Arthur is not there anymore. Adam returns home and lets himself into the workshop. Seth comes down and sees his brother looking terrible. He sobs and tells Seth that Hetty has run away. He keeps Hetty's secret, saying that she has probably run away because she could not reconcile herself to the thought of marriage. He goes to tell the Poysers and is relieved to see Mr. Poyser out for a walk as well. He tells her that he cannot figure out what Hetty did after taking the coach to Stoniton. Mr. Poyser apologizes, saying that she is not good enough to marry Adam. He says that she has probably gone after a place as a lady's maid. Adam asks Seth to explain to everyone that he has had to go on a journey quite suddenly, and he sets off to speak to Mr. Irwine", "analysis": "Anyone reading the novel at the time that it was published would have understood the delicate position of Hetty in traveling alone.  As uncommon as it was for unmarried women to travel long distances alone at that time, it was even more scandalous at the time period in which Eliot sets the novel.  Young women who traveled unprotected on the road risked the ruin of their reputations, assault, or even being pressed into service as a prostitute by older women who would gain their confidence by giving them some kind of help. To make matters worse, in Chapter Thirty-Seven, Hetty's sale of her jewelry shows a pitiful combination of basic worldliness and naA-vetA.  She has the minimum savvy to realize that her ornaments are of some value, but as an unprotected young girl, she cannot receive their full value because she does not know how to go about selling them.  She is glad just to get the bad deal that the landlord offers, because it means that she can avoid going to a shop where a jeweler might ask her uncomfortable, probing questions.   Hetty's main concern at this point seems to be to try to get away from people who know anything about her as fast as possible, and she regrets the fact that she has told the landlord the name of the man whom she was looking for. This anxiety to cover her tracks illustrates that Hetty knows that she is doing something quite dangerous and wrong.  It also suggests that she might realize that someone might try to find her by trailing her.  Therefore, she tries to leave behind as few clues as possible. Chapter Thirty-Eight repeats the pattern of crisis that has been established in the novel.  The first small crisis was the relationship between Hetty and Arthur.  The prelude to its resolution occurred when Adam found out about it.  The crisis of Hetty running away is a greater one, however, and it remains to be seen how Adam's knowledge of this situation will help as it did in the other situation. Adam's guesses about his fiancAe's whereabouts and her possible thoughts reveal once again how little he knows about her.  He assumes that she has also heard that Arthur was sent to Ireland.  More importantly, he assumes that Hetty would never travel so far without a specific invitation from Arthur.  Angrily, Adam assumes that Arthur inveigled away his bride-to-be, an assumption that the reader knows to be far from the truth. Hetty's offstage infanticide is the crisis point that serves as the crux of the novel.  Up to this point, we might have wondered where Hetty could possibly turn after her various disappointments and humiliations.  There are very few references to her possibly being pregnant, so the fact will have escaped most readers' attention by Chapter Thirty-Nine. The sudden accusation of infanticide will surprise many.  The one concrete reference to her condition is when the landlady's eyes \"presently returned to her figure, which in her hurried dressing on her journey she had taken no pains to conceal; moreover, the stranger's eye detects what the familiar unsuspecting eye leaves unnoticed.\"  Read backwards, this is a clear indication that Hetty is pregnant, but in the regular course of the narrative, it could just as easily have been read as her being careless in showing more of her figure than was advisable on her trip. In Chapter Forty, despite the fact that Methodists have been reviled in the novel for their religion, Dinah is the first person who the people tend to turn to in times of trouble.  Part of this choice has to do with the fact that they find Dinah immensely personally appealing, and they know that to gain part or all of her attention, they need only tell her of their great trouble.  She enjoys sacrifice, so she sometimes only attends to her neighbors or family if their need is very great. Bartle's threat to his female dog foreshadows the harsh judgment that will come upon Hetty.  Women who committed misdeeds of a sexual nature in that period were utterly ruined, since sexual chastity was the primary source of a woman's honor.  No one thinks to reproach Arthur in this situation, because it has been assumed that sexual activity is something for men to pursue and women to defend against. In Chapter Forty-One, for the first time at this late stage in the novel, Mr. Irwine acts as a spiritual advisor.  His advice is sound: to seek revenge is useless and hurtful to the community.  Wrongs tend to multiply; he compares wrongs to the air that men share by breathing in and out.  Adam's  agreement to do no bodily harm to Arthur demonstrates that he does hold some religious principles, despite the fact that he is not as devout as the Methodists portrayed in the novel.  This activity also relieves a plot tension. Given that Hetty's kiss with Arthur ultimately led to her trial, the reader must have also wondered about the results of Adam's initial knocking down of Arthur. In Chapter Forty-Two, due to the great stress that has been put upon him, Adam is behaving somewhat erratically.  He goes to the trouble and expense of moving to Stoniton for the duration of the trial, but until this point he has not even seen or tried to speak to Hetty.  It is strange that he has not attended the first portion of the trial, if not to comfort Hetty, at least to sate his curiosity about the proceedings and the question of her guilt. The effect that Eliot creates by Bartle telling the story of the beginning of the trial heightens the drama. Adam has to pull the information out of him, wanting him to describe the action in minute detail.  Bartle believes that it is Adam's duty to come to the courthouse, and he throws out subtle hints in his description of the scene that this is what Adam should do. In Chapter Forty-Three, the narrative of Hetty's murder of her child is horrifying.  This chapter reads almost like a sensationalist news article telling a gruesome tale.  Elements of the gothic, which were also used in the chapter about the night before Thias died, are more fully realized in this chapter.  Even the wording of the testimony is inclined to make the event sound more gruesome, if possible, than it is.  When John Olding says that the first thing that he found when he went back to investigate was a baby hand, the crowd gasps.  They, along with the reader, imagine a chopped off, disembodied hand.  This is not the case, however, because when Olding continues, it becomes clear that the hand is still attached to the body of the baby, which is partially buried. Adam's unsuccessful action at the end of the trial epitomizes his relationship with Hetty.  Even after Hetty has committed the worst crime imaginable, Adam is willing to stay at her side, supporting her.  Still, he cannot control Hetty's desire to do wayward things, and they cannot change the past.  Thus, when she falls, she must fall unsupported by Adam-as painful as that may feel to him. Arthur's optimistic return home in Chapter Forty-Four is another example of Eliot's use of dramatic irony.  The reader knows the news that awaits him, waiting for the other shoe to drop.  Arthur, by meandering around his house, seems to prolong this process even more.  His servants, knowing more than their master, are in a state similar to that of the reader, following Arthur around his home and reminding him that he has letters to read.  Arthur looks shocked when he hears the news, but what he plans to do upon reaching Stoniton remains unclear. The scene of Hetty's confession in Chapter Forty-Five is perhaps the most Gothic in the entire book.  The women are in a hostile environment, a prison so damp and dark that they can barely see one another's face.  Hetty's experience, like Adam's impressions on the night that his father died, has a supernatural tinge transmitted through noises.  It is impossible that Hetty could have heard her buried infant crying from such a distance when she buried it.  It is instead the sound of her guilt that creates the crying sound in her ears,  Hetty asks God to take from her the sound of the crying; she seems to be literally haunted by her dead child. Hetty's confession also contains distinct undertones of the moral novels that some of Eliot's predecessors wrote.  The confessions of former sinners, often former prostitutes , constituted a common genre of fiction in the 18th and 19th centuries.  They formed a tragic counterpart to the comedies of manners. Through such tales, women learned how to behave or not to behave. In Chapter Forty-Six, Adam has refused to visit Hetty until he has seen that no pardon is likely to come.  Only then does he make his final goodbyes.  Hetty seems to be completely dependent on Dinah now, and Hetty can hardly seem to stand without her help.  Bartle's approval of Dinah is surprising in that he is a confirmed misogynist, but it is unsurprising in that Eliot portrays Dinah as separate from, and perhaps above, other women. A crowd gathering to watch the execution of a criminal was a common occurrence in early England.  Especially in such a small, rural area, a hanging was an uncommon event. Even in larger towns and cities, it was quite normal to treat a hanging as a social gathering.  Women would bring their knitting and often their children, who would watch and learn their lessons.  Charles Dickens ironically describes these scenes in London and Paris in A Tale of Two Cities.  Here, in Chapter Forty-Seven, the crowd adds drama to the Hollywood moment when Arthur arrives with his pardon, shouting with surprise as he rides up on horseback. The meeting between Arthur and Adam in Chapter Forty-Eight shows that their fraternal bond is stronger than the love that either of them had for Hetty.  Perhaps it is easier for them to make up and shake hands, but for whatever reason, they decide to drop their enmity for one another.  The resolution of their argument has an important effect on the community at large, because Arthur proceeds to convince Adam to stay in Hayslope, which has a ripple effect on the others, who have thought that they should move away because Hetty has shamed them."}