{"name": "Chapter VIII", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210622234141/https://www.gradesaver.com/northanger-abbey/study-guide/summary-volume-ii-chapters-v-ix", "summary": "The General reappears from the garden, and he gives Catherine a tour of the house with Miss Tilney by her side. The drawing room, library, and kitchen strike Catherine as well-decorated, but she is dissatisfied because she wants to see the hidden, unused rooms of the house. They walk through the bedrooms and come to a set of folding doors at the end of a long hallway. Miss Tilney is about to open the doors when General Tilney stops her and concludes their tour. As they retrace their steps, Miss Tilney whispers to Catherine that she was about to show her the room where her mother died. Miss Tilney tells Catherine that her mother died of a sudden illness, and Catherine's suspicions increase. She imagines that General Tilney locked up his wife, and that she remains alive in a hidden chamber of the house without her children's knowledge. Catherine resolves to watch for the General's lamp on the side of the house where his wife died, but she falls asleep before she can keep a midnight vigil", "analysis": "In Vol. II, Chapter V, Catherine is inducted into the hospitality of the Tilney family. Yet despite her infatuation with Henry and friendship with his sister, Catherine is not altogether comfortable with the family. This is the result of General Tilney's despotic character. Before this chapter, Austen has only hinted at the tension between the father and his children, but in Chapter V we see the General's impatient and demanding side in its full light. Austen's style changes dramatically in Vol. II, Chapter VII. Whereas in Vol. I the prose centers around witty exchanges of dialogue, in Vol. II, Chapter VI these exchanges give way to lengthy descriptions of Northanger Abbey's rooms and environs. In Chapter VI, Austen mocks the melodramatic plots of Gothic novels by undermining Catherine's expectations of finding important Tilney family documents. Rather than revealing family secrets, the antique cedar chest that Catherine finds in her bedroom turns out to contain nothing more than a folded bedsheet. Through this humorous detail, Austen insists on the ordinary nature of the Tilney family estate even as Catherine indulges her fantastical desire to uncover a supernatural--or at least a previously undisclosed--history in the furnishings. Austen's technique of skewering Gothic conventions continues in Vol. II Chapter VII. Catherine's false hope of discovering a Tilney family secret is exposed once again when she believes she has found a hidden document in her bedroom cabinet. When Catherine wakes up to find that she was mistaken about the document, her hopes are deflated, and Austen returns to the realistic mode of depiction that characterized Volume I. This mode is characterized by an intense concern with the material details of everyday life, a concern that is shared by Captain Tilney. For the wealthy landowner, Catherine's visit provides the occasion to display the accumulated status symbols of a lifetime. Captain Tilney's attachment to his possessions is epitomized when he shows Catherine the greenhouses, where he has hired a \"whole parish\" of people to cultivate his favorite exotic fruits. Catherine notes that there seem to be a \"village of hot-houses\" in the garden. Austen's language here tells us that Captain Tilney's garden replicates the structure of feudal society, in which impoverished peasants toiled for the landed gentry. At the same time, his greenhouses are enabled by the latest modern innovations of the day, ones that he can afford to install on the basis of his wealth. In 18th century England, only the most privileged subset of society could enjoy such fruits as fresh pineapples. Captain Tilney scathingly notes that his staff could only grow \"one hundred in the last year,\" but Austen lets us know how rare a feat this is through Catherine's admission that she has never seen a greenhouse of this size. However, Catherine's favorable impressions of Captain Tilney's wealth is eclipsed by her surmise that he may have caused the death of his wife. Catherine's suspicions of Captain Tilney come to a head in Chapter VIII and IX. Impressionable and naive, Catherine imagines that Captain Tilney has the gloomy \"air and attitude of a Montoni,\" the villain of The Mysteries of Udolpho. Although Catherine has no proof for her conviction that Captain Tilney was cruel and murderous towards his wife, she convinces herself that he conforms to the character traits of the evil men she has read about in books. Catherine revises her assessment of Captain Tilney at the end of Chapter VIII when she hypothesizes that Captain Tilney only locked up his wife in a secret chamber instead of killing her outright. This belief, however, only makes her more determined to examine Mrs. Tilney's former bedroom in hopes of finding a clue. Once Catherine runs into Henry after exiting the bedroom in Chapter IX, she realizes that her suspicions were unfounded. Henry's speech to Catherine in Chapter IX is one of the most famous parts of Austen's novel. Under the light of rational scrutiny, Catherine's claims about the family's alleged secret unravel. Henry asks Catherine a series of rhetorical questions designed to test her unfounded convictions about his mother's death. He asks her if it is likely for a murder to go by undetected in a country where \"every man is surrounded by a neighborhood of voluntary spies\" and where \"roads and newspaper lay every thing open,\" reminding her of the advanced communications--and local gossip--that characterize their modern age. When Catherine realizes how foolish she has been, her literary fantasy comes to an end."}