{"name": "Chapter 14", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20210421150649/https://www.gradesaver.com/dracula/study-guide/summary-chapter-11-15", "summary": "Includes the September 23rd and September 24th entries of Mina Harker's journal; a letter from Van Helsing to Mina Harker, dated September 24th; a telegram from Mrs. Harker to Van Helsing, dated September 25th; letters between Van Helsing and Mrs. Harker, dated September 25th; the September 26th entry of Jonathan Harker's journal; and the September 26th entry of Dr. Seward's diary. Mina reads Jonathan's journal, and is troubled by the contents. She believes that the writings in the journal may have been influenced by the brain fever, but she is not sure. She decides to transcribe it , so that it might be made intelligible to others if the need arises. Van Helsing, who has read Mina's letters to Lucy, visits Mina to ask questions about the events leading up to Lucy's death. Mina is impressed by the doctor, and she gives him Jonathan's journal. Van Helsing reads it and comes to see the Harkers the next day. Jonathan's spirits are restored by Van Helsing's belief in him, and he is regaining his memories of the horrible events in Transylvania. Van Helsing praises Mina, her mind and her virtue, and he pledges friendship with Jonathan. He wants to ask questions to Jonathan about Transylvania at some point in the near future. As he is leaving by train, he sees the newspaper article on the \"bloofer lady\" and is horrified by how quickly the attacks have begun. Dr. Seward has reopened his diary. He reports that Renfield is back to his old business of flies and spiders. He meets with Van Helsing, who shows him the article about the wounded children and insinuates a connection between Lucy's death and the recent attacks. Seward is skeptical. Van Helsing launches into a long speech about the many unexplained phenomena in the world, urging him to open his mind. Seward guesses that whatever thing caused Lucy's death is now attacking children, which Van Helsing sadly denies. He tells Seward that the attacks were made by Lucy herself.", "analysis": "Note how little conflict there is between the heroes of the novel. All are united by virtue, pledges of friendship, and love. With the group on its way to being assembled into a full team, and with Jonathan's journal in the hands of Van Helsing, the novel has reached a major turning point. Van Helsing now knows more about what he is up against, and soon the whole group will be united in the fight against Dracula. The theme of friendship, particularly between men, is important. Many scenes have men pledging friendship with one another or pledging their loyalty to Mina. Their unity will be an indispensable asset. The coincidence of Dracula attacking Lucy, who happened to be Mina's best friend, is an argument that fate or providence has a strong hand in the novel's events. The theme of fate or God's hand in events is touched on throughout the novel. Van Helsing later states that Mina was fashioned by God for some great purpose, and the great coincidence of Jonathan's connection to Lucy seems too unlikely to be pure chance. Later, Mina wonders aloud if God chose them to suffer and do his work. Dracula is thwarted because he chooses a victim with a connection to Jonathan, a victim who is friends with a friend of Van Helsingthese forces combine to make his attempted \"invasion\" of England impossible. Harker was somehow able to survive his escape from the castle, and Van Helsing's arrival on the scene will be vital for the vampire's defeat. Fate seems to have a hand in bringing together the right people to bring about Dracula's defeat. Dr. Seward's reopening of his journal, which he though he had finished, parallels the unfinished nature of Lucy's death. What should have been the end, as Van Helsing cryptically says, is only the beginning"}