{"name": "Chapter 21", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180325141142/http://www.gradesaver.com/what-maisie-knew/study-guide/summary-chapters-19-24", "summary": "Maisie and Ida converse alone in the garden of the hotel in Folkestone. Ida starts off in a fairly sweet manner, telling Maisie that she can't understand all that has happened between her and Sir Claude and that she needs to go to South Africa because she is sick. She repeats as usual that Maisie's father wishes Maisie were dead, and she also says that both Beale and Sir Claude wishes she were dead. Maisie sees her mother moving her hands subtly and thinks that she is about to be given a coin; however, she cannot tell what amount of money it is. Ida's good temper turns suddenly when Maisie brings up the Captain and the way he had complimented Ida when Maisie spoke to him in the park. Ida closes herself off to Maisie, stands, and calls her daughter an idiot. Maisie tells her mother that she thought Ida liked the Captain, and she feels devastated at the idea of Ida giving up \"such a loyalty as that\". Ida sees this, and it enrages her further. When Maisie says that she had assumed the Captain would go with her mother to South Africa, Ida is stunned into a long silence. Finally, she insults Maisie a last time, turns, and walks away alone. When Ida has left the garden, Maisie sits down alone on the bench; she sits for a long while as it turns to night. When Sir Claude appears in the doorway, accompanied by the sound of a gong, she goes to meet him. She confirms what Sir Claude can plainly see: her mother is gone. Sir Claude tries to keep the tone light by offering his arm to escort her inside. As they walk, Maisie tells him about Ida going to South Africa and about how she seemed like she was going to give Maisie money. He suggests that Ida may not have been holding a coin but \"a ten-pound note. rolled up in a tight little ball, you know - her way of treating banknotes\". Maisie is upset at the thought of missing out on that much money, and also disquieted because Sir Claude's knowledge of this habit, which Maisie did not know about, reveals how much Maisie does not know about her parents and their relationships. They go on to dinner, then Maisie accompanies Sir Claude to smoke on a terrace. Sir Claude says they must get Maisie on a schedule of going to bed at a reasonable hour, but he doesn't force the issue and seems to want to stay up himself. Sir Claude says something that Maisie feels he had been waiting to say: \"I'm free--I'm free\". Maisie repeats this back to him. He tells her that they will go to France the next day, and then he again repeats the phrase, \"I'm free--I'm free\". He sends Maisie up to bed, and she goes willingly, excited at the prospect of going to France", "analysis": "As a modern reader, it is difficult to read Maisie's racist impressions of the Countess in Chapter 19. She repeatedly calls the Countess \"the brown lady\"  and states that \"She literally struck the child more as an animal than as a 'real' lady; she might have been a clever frizzled poodle in a frill or a dreadful human monkey in a spangled petticoat. She had a nose that was far too big and eyes that were far too small and a moustache that was, well, not so happy a feature as Sir Claude's\" . This antiquated, discriminatory language toward people of African descent is all the more shocking and disturbing coming from a child. It must be imagined that Maisie's racist thoughts are the product of her upbringing, another negative effect of her parents' and guardians' speech and behavior being passed down to her. It is also important to note that James created the Countess as a confident, financially self-sufficient character, showing that any negative characterization comes from Maisie rather than the author or narrator. Ida's presence in Folkestone in Chapters 20 and 21 mark a turning point in the story: the last time either of Maisie's biological parents is involved in the story. This makes it an apt time to examine Jame's moral message regarding family. The story raises questions about three kinds of relations: biological, legal, and emotional. By the removal of Ida and Beale from Maisie's life, James shows that biological relation is not the last word in creating a stable family. The major question for the remainder of the book is whether legal relatedness will take any precedence over emotional relatedness in Maisie's choice of a guardian, as well as to whom, out of Sir Claude, Mrs. Wix, and Mrs. Beale, she has the strongest legal and emotional relationships. Letters are a motif in What Maisie Knew, particularly in this section of the novel. Throughout the book, letters are used to represent relationships. Communication by letter makes it easy to keep relationships secret, though it also makes relationships subject to obstruction by others. This can be seen earlier in the novel when Mrs. Wix tries to stay in communication with Maisie but is thwarted by Miss Overmore/Mrs. Beale as well as when Sir Claude keeps his relationship with Miss Overmore/Mrs. Beale a secret from Maisie by communicating with her mostly through letters. In this section of the book, Sir Claude and Miss Overmore/Mrs. Beale again communicate through letters, showing their continued romantic relationship. Of particular importance is the letter--or rather, letters--in Chapter 24. Miss Overmore/Mrs. Beale sends a letter to Sir Claude which includes a letter from Beale to her effectively breaking off their marriage. The symbol of a letter within a letter shows how adultery and lies have muddled relationships between multiple characters. Another motif that recurs at multiple points in this section is the blushing and paling of characters. This communicates information about characters' emotional states. Characters are shown to pale in moments of shock or horror and blush in moments of embarrassment or passion. For example, when Beale asks Maisie if she'll join him in moving to America at the beginning of this section, James writes, \"Planted once more before him in the middle of the room she felt herself turning white\" . This shows her displeasure at the idea, even though she answers affirmatively. An example of a character blushing comes later in the section when Sir Claude asks Mrs. Wix whether Ida was alone when she came to call. The text reads, \"Mrs Wix was red now: his good humour wouldn't keep down her colour, which for a minute glowed there like her ugly honesty\" . In this case, Mrs. Wix's blush reveals her embarrassment for Sir Claude and her strong feelings about Ida's immorality. Violent imagery is used frequently in this section of the novel to depict Ida and Beale's behavior toward Maisie. In Chapter 21, Ida brutally tells Maisie that \"Your father wishes you were dead\" , and two chapters later Sir Claude remarks that \" has chucked our friend here overboard not a bit less than if she had shoved her, shrieking and pleading, out of that window and down two floors to the paving-stones\" . By describing both Beale and Ida wishing or causing the death of Maisie, James communicates that Maisie's relationship with her biological parents is completely finished. The vivid, violent language also communicates how severely James treats Ida and Beale's choice to abandon their child."}