{"name": "Chapter  12", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20180820035817/http://www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/monkeynotes/pmKidnapped22.asp", "summary": "At six o'clock the next morning, Alan and David assess their position. They are satisfied with their performance in the fight. In the aftermath of victory, they sit down to have a drink. Alan commends David for his abilities and gives him a silver button from his coat as a mark of friendship. A short while later, Mr. Riach approaches and asks David and Alan to meet with the captain. David has misgivings, but Alan thinks it is a good idea to talk with him. Hoseason presents himself at the appointed time and informs Alan of the problems the ship now faces. As a result of the skirmish, the ship has an insufficient crew and must go back to the port at Glasgow to hire more hands. Alan again offers sixty guineas to the captain and asks him to direct the ship towards Linnhe Loch. The captain finally agrees to go ashore in Alan's part of the country.", "analysis": "Notes This chapter shows another side of Alan's character. Although he has proven himself to be calculating, strong, and brave, he now proves that he is also arrogant. Cutting off a silver button from his coat, he gives it to David saying, \"Wherever you go, show that button and friends of Alan Breck will come around you.\" He is also self-confident enough to meet with the captain without fear. After all the action and excitement of the previous chapter, this one depicts the calm after the storm. David and Alan are in a pensive and relaxed mood until Riach approaches them, asking the young men to meet with the captain. During the meeting, it is obvious that the tables have been turned on Hoseason. At the beginning of the journey, the captain gives orders like a master and David obeys. Now Alan and David dictate the terms, while the captain obeys. He even gives in to Alan's desire to plow ahead to Linnhe Loch; of course, Alan offers money to gain his agreement. CHAPTER 12: I Hear of the Red Fox Summary At the beginning of this chapter, Alan and David are in a relaxed mood, smoking pipes and talking about their adventures. Alan gives information about his background. He is a deserter from the English army who is now working for the French army. Every year he visits Scotland to pick up military recruits for the French and to collect rents from the tenants on behalf of Ardshiel, who was forced out of the country and is now living on the continent. Alan also describes his intense hatred for the Campbells. Colin Campbell, popularly known as Red Fox, has made himself the representative of King George to collect his dues of land revenue. Learning that families were still supporting their exiled chief, Campbell tells them he will force them off their lands if they do not give him the money he seeks. Those who do not obey his orders are forced to move, causing Ardshiel to loose their financial support. Notes This chapter gives some Background Information that reveal factual persons and events in Scottish history. As David and Alan guard the round-house, they visit with one another. Alan tells about himself. David, patriotic and honest, is aghast when Alan reveals himself to be a deserter from the English army. The Jacobite Scotsman, whose offense is punishable by death, is not perturbed. David also notes with interest the vehemence with which Alan shows his allegiance to his leader, Ardshiel, and his hatred for the Red Fox. David is surprised at the devotion of the Highlanders, who are prepared to pay rents to their exiled chief when they already pay rents to King George. David is also pleased to learn about the wild Highland countryside and its people. CHAPTER 13: The Loss of the Brig Summary Late at night, Hoseason comes to the roundhouse. He is fearful for the safety of the ship, for the weather is bad and the route is dangerous. Alan does everything he can to help save the ship and avoid the reefs. Just as they began to celebrate their safe passage, the ship is caught by the tide and tossed upon a reef. A large wave hits the ship, and David is washed into the sea. Although he is not a swimmer, he manages to stay afloat and paddle to safety. Notes A new adventure is about to begin for David. Thrown overboard, he manages to paddle and kick himself to the shore of a seemingly deserted island. He is tired and anxious upon his arrival, a stark contrast to the relaxed young man in the last chapter. His situation again seems hopeless, a fact which changes the mood and tone of the story."}