{"name": "Chapter 19", "url": "https://web.archive.org/web/20201219141110/https://www.shmoop.com/study-guides/literature/dracula/summary/chapter-19", "summary": "Quincey and Van Helsing ask why Seward didn't allow Renfield to go, and Seward says he was afraid Renfield wanted to go help Dracula somehow. They use a skeleton key to get into Carfax. Van Helsing hands out crucifixes and pieces of blessed communion wafers. They go into the chapel to check things out. Dracula hasn't called a cleaning service in a while: The place is covered with inches of dust and it smells like a locker room after a muggy summer season combined with ancient evil. They only find twenty-nine boxes. Where could the other twenty-one be? The place is filled with rats. Luckily, they brought a supply of terrier dogs, which were bred to kill rats. Problem solved. Of course, they still have the other problem of the twenty-one missing boxes of dirt and the bloodthirsty vampire on the loose. They go back to Seward's house and go to bed. Jonathan Harker notices that Mina looks a little pale. Van Helsing and Dr. Seward have a little chat about Renfield. Renfield is very sullen again and doesn't want to talk to either of them. Seward assures Van Helsing that he thinks it's for the best that Mina stay out of the way of their vampire-hunting. It's not a lady's business. Mina is in a bad mood this morning, maybe because her husband won't tell her anything that happened the night before. She describes what she did while they were at the Count's house snooping around. She says she went to bed when they left, but didn't feel sleepy. She could hear the dogs barking next door and Renfield praying very loudly from his room below. She thought she saw a mist coming toward the house when she looked out the window. When she went to sleep she had weird dreams--something about a \"pillar of cloud\" in her room that seemed to have two red eyes. Again, Mina doesn't sleep well, so she asks Dr. Seward to give her something to help her sleep. History Snack! Sleep aids in 1897 meant combinations of opium and alcohol. That stuff will knock you out. And it's addictive. She takes the sleep aid and falls asleep.", "analysis": ""}